-> On page 1 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Deep gold color. Surprisingly lively on the nose for its age. A complex array of fruit (tangerine, sultana, pink grapefruit, papaya, and the general overall citrus DNA that you’ll find in old Bowmores), with balancing notes of honey and vanilla. A hint of damp smoke and coconut. Just like with Black Bowmore, this is a texturally soothing whisky on the palate, which continues to evolve in waves -- first the sweet honey, coating vanilla, and lively fruit, then turning quite visceral, with juicy oak, damp earth, deep peat smoke, and charcoal, followed by another wave of fruit (this time, dried fruit), finishing off with subtle charred oak and roasted nuts. This whisky is better than White Bowmore, and it falls just short of Black Bowmore (which I rated 97), because it’s just a bit softer and less vibrant on the palate.
      		
 
			
 
Definitely showing its age, but not in a bad way — the distillery character is still there. Solid foundation of thick, chewy toffee, old pot still rum, and fig cake. Fruity too, with notes of golden raisin and nectarine. Soft, seductive peat smoke, juicy oak, cinnamon, and brine round out the palate. Excellent balance! One of the finest Bowmore whiskies I’ve ever tasted (and, at this price, will probably never taste again.) (Editor's Pick) 
      		
 
			
 
The Dalmore is one of a handful of whiskies that seem to be able to age in the cask for many decades and still improve. This one is incredibly viscous on the nose and palate (and very heavy on the tongue), with chewy toffee and old pot still rum. The classic Dalmore marmalade note shines throughout, along with vanilla cream, an array of dried spices (especially cinnamon and evergreen), juicy oak, forest bedding, rancio, old armagnac, polished leather, tobacco, maple syrup, dark chocolate, almond macaroon, and subtle espresso. Long, mouth-coating finish. The flavors evolve like waves lapping on the palate -- especially the interplay with the oak. I can’t drink this whisky slowly enough. A rare experience for the lucky few who can afford it. (Price is per 100ml).
      		
 
			
 
A rich amber color and elegantly oxidized notes greet you. There are luscious old fruits—pineapple, dried peach, apricot—and puffs of coal-like smokiness. In time, sweet spices (cumin especially) emerge. Superbly balanced. The palate, while fragile, still has real sweetness alongside a lick of treacle. It can take a drop of water, allowing richer, darker fruits to emerge. The finish is powerful, long, and resonant. Superb, not over-wooded, and a fair price for such a rarity. £1,995
      		
 
			
 
It’s great that Glenlivet releases whiskies under the 'Cellar Collection' label. It really shows the true potential of Glenlivet. This bottling is classic ultra-matured Glenlivet, and rivals the 1959 vintage Cellar Collection as the best one ever. An incredibly complex whisky, with notes of vanilla, ripe barley, coconut, and caramel. All this is accentuated by glazed orange, hazelnut, and a potpourri of dried spices. Not the least bit tired for such an aged whisky. (Only 800 bottles for the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Classic sherry cask-aged Macallan. Antique amber with hints of ruby. Thickly textured, complex, and quite deep, with notes of toffee, ripe pit fruit, raisin, apple pie, dried spice (cinnamon, clove, ginger, and mint), and a wisp of smoke. An exceptional, multi-faceted Macallan! 

      		
 
			
 
Surprisingly lively. Very much like the 21 year old release in this regard, but not as spicy on the nose or palate. Instead, the spice is replaced by a layered, satisfying sweetness -- not by wood, like the somewhat lethargic, oak-dominated 23 year old release. Older doesn’t mean that it 
 older. Deep, nutty toffee foundation, with nougat, candied tropical fruit, and shoo-fly pie. The spices (cinnamon, spearmint, vanilla, cocoa powder) emerge mid-palate and linger, warming the finish. Not as vibrant as the 21 year old expression, but more sophisticated. I can’t speak for the other barrels in this lot, but I think this one is a great example of what a 20-plus year old rye whiskey should taste like.
      		
 
			
 
Deep amber color. Bold and surprisingly youthful aromas, and quite vibrant for its age-huge spicy notes (mint, cinnamon, vanilla, anise, freshly ground pepper), with rich toffee, caramel and background fruit. Rich, enveloping body. Enormous in flavor, with youthful dynamic spices (mint, cinnamon, vanilla, pepper), wrapped in rich toffee and molasses, tamed by mature oak and leather notes. The flavors intensify on the palate, ultimately reaching a crescendo. The boldness of the spices and maturity of age dovetail perfectly. Its finish is very satisfying and seemingly eternal. 

      		
 
			
 
Very similar to last year’s release. Well rounded, with a gently sweet foundation (toffee, vanilla taffy), pleasant spice (cinnamon, mocha, soft evergreen), date, glazed citrus, bramble, and a gentle finish for a rye. A classic ultra-aged rye whiskey. 
      		
 
			
 
Just what the category was missing -- a stellar, young, barrel-proof rye whiskey. Hugely spicy, with piercing mint, fiery cinnamon, vanilla, coconut, and fennel. Underlying notes of caramel, honey, and Seville orange provide some civility. It has more zing and richness than other young rye whiskeys, and it lacks the tired woodiness of the majority of the older rye expressions on the market. A clean, powerful, vibrant whisky that is a must for any rye enthusiast.
-> On page 2 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The first rye whiskey I have tasted to rival the Sazerac Rye 18 year old. This is a great whiskey from beginning to end. Soothing layers of sweetness (vanilla, maple syrup, cookie dough, toffee) are balanced by candied fruit and waves of spice (mint, cinnamon, nutmeg, cocoa powder).l The palate is clean, the flavors are deep, the spices are well-defined, and there’s not one hint of excessive or tired oak. A bench-mark rye. (A Ledger’s Liquors exclusive.) 

      		
 
			
 
Wow! After the wonderful 12 year old cask strength, Redbreast does it again. This is a different beast altogether, but it is a stunner. This is Roger Waters doing The Wall: over the top, unsubtle, and totally entertaining. There’s lots going on: fermenting apples, juicy oils, spice, and dark cherry and berry fruits zip and fizz over the palate, the wood influence is sublime. I'm comfortably numb.
      		
 
			
 
Very elegant, complex, and stylish. Honeyed and silky in texture, with toffee, toasted marshmallow, nougat, maple syrup, banana bread, and a hint of toasted coconut. Bright fruit and golden raisin blend in nicely with the layers of sweetness. Impeccable balance and very approachable. Classic Irish whiskey! (Value Pick)
      		
 
			
 
Irish Distillers has already released two 90+ pot still whiskeys this year, but this is the knockout blow, an immense take on the wonderful Redbreast. The nose gives little away, all damp autumn leaves and fermenting forest fruit, but on the palate it's a fireworks display, a colorful mix of apple and pear, berries, vine fruits, chocolate liqueur, and oily pureed fruit. It's coming to the States soon, and rumor has it there's more to follow. But this will do. I can't think if I've ever tasted a better Irish whiskey.  €75
      		
 
			
 
From one barrel, and only sold in one location, but well worth the effort to procure a bottle. Nutty toffee, pecan pie, apricot, berried jam, and nougat, peppered with cinnamon, mint, cocoa, and tobacco. Warming, with polished leather and dried spice on the finish.  Seamless, richly textured, and impeccably balanced. (Exclusive to the Bourbon Heritage Center at the Heaven Hill distillery in Bardstown, KY.) 
      		
 
			
 
The complete package: uncut, unfiltered, full-flavored, richly textured (almost chewy), and very complex. Notes of toffee-coated nuts, vanilla fudge, polished leather, cedar-tinged tobacco, barrel char, cocoa powder, and a hint of fig, wrapped up with a firm oak grip on the finish. Worth every penny of the premium price being charged for this commemorative release. Editor's Choice.
      		
 
			
 
Though aged in virgin American oak, it’s distillery character that’s in charge here; a fully expressive Yoichi. Rich, mysterious, layered, mixing rich fruit compote with scented coastal smoke (ozone, tar, soot) alongside masses of vetiver and cigar humidor. The palate is oily and immense, with fluxing layers of sweet fruit, oily peat, salt, and ink; camphor, flax seed, and in among the smoke, apple mint. Long, insanely complex, and jaw-droppingly good. This will go down as a classic. €185
      		
 
			
 
Crown Royal has always been a very stylish, silky smooth whisky. This bottling adds a new dimension in flavor and texture with its cognac cask finishing. A velvety smooth whisky with notes of creamy vanilla, butterscotch, nougat, dried fruit, and gentle spice are well-defined and nicely balanced. Gently sweet, fruity finish. Crown Royal’s best effort to date. 

      		
 
			
 
Creamy, silky texture on the palate. Richer than the flagship Crown Royal, but still quite clean on the palate. Along with creamy vanilla, delicate fruit and floral notes, you’ll also find caramel and butterscotch, a peppering of spice (particularly cinnamon), and light nougat. Silky smooth finish. A benchmark whisky in the traditional Canadian style. 

      		
 
			
 
Jameson’s newest premium release. The combination of aging some of the pot still whiskey in port casks, including some older whiskeys (over 20 years old), and bottling at 46% ABV (and not chill-filtered) has helped make this a rich, deep, and complex spirit. This is a silky smooth, lush, multi-faceted whiskey with notes of honeydew melon, nectarine, banana bread, creamy vanilla, chocolate fudge, toffee, warming cinnamon, and nutmeg. The port influence marries nicely with robust oak notes, and the grain whiskey component helps to keep it very drinkable. A more intense affair when compared to the “great anytime” 18 year old expression. A classic after-dinner Irish whiskey.

-> On page 3 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Rich, silky, and oily in texture. Extremely well-integrated flavors loaded with ripe berries, caramelized banana, nougat, date nut bread, glazed tangerine, and maple syrup, peppered with warming cinnamon, vanilla icing, and nutmeg. Firm, dry resinous finish to balance the sweetness. I love the pot still character and the lushness that some of the port-wood aging has imparted. If anything, even richer and more lush than the previous 2007 vintage I reviewed. Another classic Jameson Rarest Vintage Reserve.
      		
 
			
 
A marriage of three different single malts, aged in American and French oak. This whisky shows the advantage of marrying whiskies from more than one distillery (when properly done). Vibrant, with a complex array of fruit (orchard fruit, sultana), sweetness (light toffee, marzipan, honeyed malt), spice (creamy vanilla, mocha, warming pepper), smoke (tar, smoked olive, coal), and lesser notes of toasted almond and beach pebbles. More smoke and tar on the palate than the nose, yet always in balance. Well played! (Editor's Choice)
      		
 
			
 
As you’d expect, solid peat is the first thing out of the glass, but this isn’t just a peat beast. Underneath are honey, dried fruit, and malt. The palate is all about balance, with honeyed malt, raisin, and oak spice all complementing smoky peat. A lush mouthfeel makes you forget it’s cask strength. A pure love note in a glass from Compass Box to Park Avenue Liquor.  (
)
      		
 
			
 
Formulated to celebrate the 200th anniversary of Johnnie Walker. This is a fabulous whisky for anyone who can spring for the bottle. It is deep, dark, and quite powerful with a hefty malt foundation and sweeter notes of toffee and vanilla combined with resinous oak, complex fruit (both bright citrus notes and darker pit fruits), crisp mint, tobacco, polished leather, and heavy peat smoke. A tour de force of a blended scotch-as big as many single malts reviewed here. 

      		
 
			
 
An essay in balance on both the aroma and palate. Silky layers of delicate sweetness (honeyed vanilla, caramel, light toffee) permeate through clean, delicate fruit (citrus, peach, currant), and subtle, complex dried spice. Clean finish, with a hint of dark chocolate. A very versatile, very drinkable blend which suits most moods and occasions. Indeed, a benchmark blended scotch. 

      		
 
			
 
A perennial classic. Not aggressively bold like its younger sibling (Thomas H. Handy), but this is a rye of distinction and class. Still quite vibrant for its age, with plenty of spice (cinnamon, soft evergreen, vanilla, hint of nutmeg) softened and balanced by sweet notes (caramel, toffee), glazed citrus, and dried oak on the finish. This remains the benchmark for what a mature rye whiskey should taste like.  
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in 1986. An excellent old wheated bourbon. Soothing oily texture, with notes of toffee, old rum, nougat, vanilla bean, candied fruit, black raspberry, corn bread, hints of Earl Grey tea, cinnamon, and nutmeg, with a smooth, polished oak finish. I recently reviewed a Pappy Van Winkle Family Reserve 23 year old (bottle #B1986) at 47.8%, which I also thought was outstanding, with a comparable flavor profile (although some earlier bottlings I tasted years ago were heavy on the oak), and it was priced at $220. Given this, you need to ask yourself if you want to pay the extra $130 or so for the higher strength, special decanter, pair of glasses, and wood box that comes with this new ORVW Family Selection. Or not. 

      		
 
			
 
The key to bourbons that use wheat instead of rye (like this Weller), is to get the right amount of wood influence to balance the sweet notes and add depth. This whiskey does a great job of it. Notes of dark fruit (blackberry, plum, blueberry), layered sweetness (maple syrup, toffee, caramel), and dried spice (cinnamon, vanilla). Soft, pleasant finish.  
      		
 
			
 
No age statement, but distilled in 1998. The only wheated recipe bourbon in the 2011 Antique Collection, and a very good one at that. Higher in strength than last year’s offering (which was 63.3%), but very similar (and equally as impressive). The most elegant and smoothest of this collection, with layered sweetness (honey, caramel, marzipan, maple syrup), fig, blackberry preserve, hint of green tea, and just the right amount of spice for balance (nutmeg, cinnamon, cocoa). 
      		
 
			
 
The traditionally gentle demeanor of this wheated bourbon is jazzed up with some lovely complex spice (mostly coming from the oak). Sweet notes of maple syrup, silky caramel, blackberry jam, and blueberry are peppered with notes of allspice spiked with cinnamon and vanilla. Soft leather on the finish. Great balance. A lovely whiskey! Buffalo Trace Antique Collection 2013 Release.
-> On page 4 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Very mellow, silky in texture, and on the sweet side for mature bourbon. It’s not bold like Parker’s Heritage Collection 27 year old, which has much more oak spice and resin. Willett’s foundation of molasses and toffee is accentuated by candied fruit, fig, dusty corn, and tobacco, with mint tea, cinnamon, and vanilla peppered throughout. It’s perilously drinkable. I am impressed how these 20-plus year old Willett rye and bourbon whiskeys maintain their balance and keep the oak in check. Splendid ultra-mature bourbon. (Less than 100 bottles of this were sent to California, and not all the same barrel. Happy hunting.)

      		
 
			
 
Batch #1, while a very good bourbon, didn’t quite seem to reach its potential. The flavors were there, but were not integrated and as cohesive as I would have hoped for in a four-grain, pot-distilled bourbon. Batch #2 has realized this whiskey’s full potential. The flavors I expect are all there, and they are more tightly integrated and polished. It really does taste different than any other bourbon on the market. I particularly enjoy its silky, creamy, nutty sweetness, which is balanced nicely with dry spice notes that peak on the finish. It’s very soothing and enjoyable. A whisky for bourbon and scotch drinkers alike. 

      		
 
			
 
Surprisingly light and fresh for a 15 year old whiskey. Crisply spiced, with cinnamon, evergreen, vanilla, anise, and teaberry. Hints of dried fruit, kissed with light honey and a wisp of smoke. Balanced and clean throughout, and very drinkable. An excellent whiskey! Price is per 375ml.
      		
 
			
 
Very elegant, bright, and silky smooth, with honey-kissed summer fruits, subtle tropical fruit (papaya, coconut, pineapple), gentle caramel, sweet corn, and soothing vanilla, along with a dusting of cinnamon, nutmeg, and crisp mint. Pleasing, gently spicy finish. The most impressive aspect of this whiskey isn’t its variety of flavors (they are fairly traditional for a bourbon this age), it’s their integration and remarkable balance! It’s also perilously drinkable. I can’t speak for the other barrels, but if you can track down some bottles of Barrel No. 1, buy two! You won’t be disappointed. Let me also note what a great value this whiskey is, compared to the way other premium American whiskeys are being priced. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged 11 years, this year’s single barrel release is a lively mix of caramel and bright, zingy orange on palate entry. Cinnamon, vanilla, and mint emerge mid-palate, leading to polished oak, baked apple, and a hint of leather on the finish. A lively bourbon, with crisp, clean flavors and nicely balanced. Another winner from Four Roses.
      		
 
			
 
Like the William Larue Weller releases a couple years back, I felt that the Stagg releases (after being brought down in strength) were almost too easy-going. Like the new Weller release, this bourbon has improved greatly, to classic status. Clean, balanced notes of toffee, molasses, nougat, polished leather, dates, roasted nuts, cinnamon, subtle summer fruits, teasing mint, ground coffee, nutmeg, and a hint of tobacco. Long, balanced finish. An outstanding bourbon!

      		
 
			
 
At this strength, it’s almost like getting two whiskeys for the price of one. A great value, considering its age. (It’s not identified on the label, but was distilled in 1993.) Try to find a great 18 year old, cask-strength single malt scotch for this price. Very mature — with a good dose of oak — but not excessively so. Notes of toffee, tobacco, dark molasses, roasted nuts, dried vanilla, leather, and a hint of dusty corn. Dry on the finish, with lingering leather and tobacco.
      		
 
			
 
Less alcohol than past Staggs, even at 128.2° proof. This whiskey has always been one of the best in the portfolio, and its reputation is intact. Sweeter and fuller in body than recent releases, and not as masculine, making it easier to drink. (Don’t worry; it’s still a big Stagg, but with a smaller “rack.”) Vanilla taffy, nougat, dates, polished oak, roasted nuts, leather, and tobacco: it’s all there. Buffalo Trace Antique Collection 2013.
      		
 
			
 
There are two noteworthy items regarding this whiskey. It’s the first barrel-proof whiskey released by Heaven Hill for the U.S. market. It’s also the first of what will be an ongoing series of releases under the “Parker’s Heritage Collection” label. This one is rich, with thick toffee, molasses, vanilla fudge, and Heath bar. It’s also well balanced, with underlying exotic spice, summer fruit, dusty corn, and tobacco to balance the sweeter notes. Long, soothing, finish. A nicely matured bourbon of character and pedigree. (Originally reviewed in Volume 16, No. 4) 

      		
 
			
 
Cask #3145 is the lighter in color, and the sweet notes that balance the smoke and seaweed are not as deeply caramelized as Cask #3542. I’m tasting hints of shortbread and caramel, which show through the peat smoke, tobacco, toasted nuts, firm spice notes (cinnamon, clove, and mint), and lingering brine. Very complex. 
Price listed includes the entire Double Barrel 1974 Vintage set.
-> On page 5 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
With the Ardbeg 17 year old off the market, it’s nice to see a new Ardbeg in the line-up. Uigeadail costs about the same as the Ardbeg 17 did but, with Uigeadail, you’re getting a much more interesting whisky. Uigeadail consists of a marriage of younger whisky (from 1990 and 1993) with much older whisky matured in sherry casks. The marriage works exceptionally well, with the younger whiskies providing the classic Ardbeg intensity many of us have come to expect, while the older whiskies contribute depth, maturity, and complexity. And bottling the whisky at cask-strength without chill-filtration ensures that none of the flavors are stripped out. This is an incredibly complex Islay whisky, with its bonfire smoke, brine, and peppered olive notes balanced by a taming sweetness of vanilla, marshmallow, and toffee. Interwoven notes of candied fruit and sugared almonds round out the palate. Incredibly long finish. 

      		
 
			
 
The whisky is sensational, a glorious mix of ginseng syrup, baked banana, semi-dried tropical fruits, and an exotic smoked edge. Without the last, you could believe it was a delicate Cognac. In time, there’s peppermint and guava syrup. A sip is all you need to reveal perfect, thrilling harmony: light nuttiness, pollen, subtle fruits, gentle smoke, and light fungal touches. It’s stunning, but it’s £16,000! Whisky this great, even in limited quantities, should be fairly priced. Points off. £16,000
      		
 
			
 
Astonishingly fresh and clean for 30 years in oak, and with incredible depth. Slight oily texture. Appetizing brine, with honeyed vanilla, mustard seed, green olive, Seville orange, and lemon zest. Underlying smoke, damp peat, and seaweed. Put simply, Brora at its finest. 

      		
 
			
 
Bottled in 2004, but just recently put in circulation here in the U.S. (Very strange.) It’s worth the wait. It’s fresh (even at 22 years old), appetizing, spicy, and briny. There’s a sweet foundation of vanilla wafer and caramel, with a slightly oily texture. White pepper, seaweed, mustard seed, lime, gherkin, and teasing gin botanicals add complexity. Spicy, salty finish. A vibrant, dynamic expression of the shuttered original Clynelish distillery. Quite stunning, actually. Find yourself a bottle before they’re gone!
      		
 
			
 
This whisky has all the positive aspects of a very mature whisky (depth, complexity) without all the negative ones (excessive oak, one-dimensional). Very clean, but oily in texture, with honeyed vanilla, caramel, citrus (tangerine, orange, lemon), nectarine, olive brine, black pepper, ginger, cut grass, mustard seed, and just the hint of teasing smoke. Briny, spicy finish. Wonderful!
      		
 
			
 
Though Brora has acquired cult status, it has to be said that for a few years these Special Release Broras went through an off-putting butyric phase, which might well have put off newbies to this legendary closed site, who must have wondered what all the fuss was about.
One nose of the 2010 SR shows that these days have been consigned to the past. This is classy from the word go. Gold in color; the nose manages to be both overtly waxy — I’m reminded of waxed paper — and fragrant. Behind that is coal smoke, rather than the heavy peatiness of earlier vintages (Brora’s peating levels varied in its last years). In other words, this is robust and powerful, with an evocative aroma that speaks of old sea chests, the seashore, and vellum. Hugely concentrated, with massed fruits — quince especially — following behind. This is amplified with a drop or two of water. 
The palate is unctuous and heavy. Tectonic plates move more quickly than this does in the mouth. When it does, the oily/waxy textures and flavors move slowly — camphor, peach, membrillo, hints of citrus, and toward the finish a growing brininess (akin to olives) and a hint of smoke. Elemental and one of the best Broras for years. [not available in the U.S.]£280  
      		
 
			
 
Maturation of this 1978 distillate has taken place in European oak and refill American oak casks. Fresh and fruity on the early, herbal nose; a hint of wax, plus brine, developing walnut fudge, and an underlying wisp of smoke. Finally, wood resin. The palate is very fruity, with mixed spices, then plain chocolate, damp undergrowth, gentle peat smoke, and finally coal. Mildly medicinal. Ashy peat and aniseed linger in the long, slowly drying finish. Brora at its very best. 
Editor's Choice
      		
 
			
 
It has been quite a while since we’ve seen a new Glenfarclas here in the U.S. but, after tasting this whisky, it was worth the wait. Glenfarclas is a rich, stylish whisky that ages very well, and this 1968 vintage proves it. It is very deep and mature, with complex fruit (sultana, marmalade) layered by sweetness (honey, caramel, and toffee). All those years in oak contribute another dimension to the whisky, providing a dry, oaky spiciness, polished leather, and a hint of tobacco-especially on the finish. Never does the whisky taste tired or excessively woody. It expresses all that is good about an older whisky, without any of the down side. I’m told that most of the 1,400 bottles imported to the U.S. went to the Chicago area. It’s worth taking the extra time to track down a bottle. 

      		
 
			
 
Glenfarclas has a proven track record for aging very well. I’ve enjoyed some amazing 25 and 30 year old expressions, in addition to some older vintage offerings. Does this new 40 year old follow suit? Absolutely! It’s complex and well-rounded, with great depth and no excessive oak. Lush, candied citrus (especially orange), old pot still rum, maple syrup, fig, roasted nuts, and polished leather, with hints of mocha, candied ginger, and tobacco. A bit oily in texture (which I find soothing) with good tannic grip on the finish. A classic, well-matured Glenfarclas — and a very good value for its age. (Editor's Choice)
      		
 
			
 
An excellent example of an ultra-mature, sherried whisky done the right way. Much darker and more decadent than the other two releases here. Silky texture. Rummy, jammy fruit, toasted walnut, leather, spice (cinnamon, clove), tobacco, and dark chocolate, with a foundation of juicy oak. Tasting this whisky, you know it’s old, but you also know it’s very good. 
-> On page 6 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
A marriage of three casks, one of them an ex-sherry butt. The sherry is certainly evident, and this is more sherried than many of the Cellar Collection whiskies to date. Opulent and seductive, with prominent fruit (glazed spiced oranges, ripe peach, and hints of pineapple and coconut), caramel-coated nuts, and vanilla custard. A peppering of ginger and cinnamon throughout. Coating, soothing finish. Polished and seamless, with no trace of excessive oak. One of the richest -- and finest -- Cellar Collections to date. Anyone willing and able to cough up the bucks for this whisky will be richly rewarded. (Only 240 bottles available in the U.S., beginning June 2010.)
      		
 
			
 
Dark and decadent. Notes of old pot still rum, roasted nuts, chocolate fudge, burnished leather, Dundee cake, tobacco, and a hint of damp peat. When I drink this, I feel like I’m sitting in the study of a stately Scottish mansion contemplating a fine, aged Cuban cigar. Royalty in a glass. (Bottled for Binny’s Beverage Depot) 

      		
 
			
 
The flavors evolve on the nose and palate, with peat kiln smoke, fresh asphalt, damp earth warehouses, morning-after campfire ash, and old boat dock contrasting nicely with toffee apple, crème caramel, delicate raspberry preserve, and dried citrus. Long, smoky, spicy, briny, seaweed, dirty martini-tinged finish. This whisky comes from a combination of both sherry and bourbon casks, and the marriage works. I also like that it retains some of its youthful brashness, while showing the depth that maturity affords a whisky. A delicious, well-balanced, old-fashioned Laphroaig.(Reviewing this whisky gave me an excuse to open a “fresh” bottle of its predecessor, the 30 year old, and here are my thoughts. The 30 year old is softer, mellower, drier, and more debonair. The 25 year old is bolder, more youthful, more dynamic, richer, and sweeter -- bottling at cask strength really helps here. Both whiskies are very nice, but quite different in personality.)
      		
 
			
 
Amber color. Richly textured (great mouth feel), with vanilla fudge, nougat, ripe citrus, and ginger cake leading to a complex, spicy finish. Great depth on this one. Well-polished. My pick of the lot.
      		
 
			
 
Quite fresh and appetizing for a 35 year old whisky, but not too surprising for a Springbank. Notes of creamy vanilla, burnt caramel, coconut custard, brine, and a hint of anise. Complex, vibrant, and well-balanced. Reminds me why I love those old Springers. Devotees will not be disappointed. A stunning whisky! (Exclusive to Astor Wines and Spirits.) 

      		
 
			
 
Bottled in 2001, but still in circulation and (fortunately) just finding its way to me. These Springers from the ‘60s are getting rarer and quite expensive. This is a great example of why they are so coveted -- clean and well matured, with no sign of excessive oak. Elegant sherried fruit dovetails nicely with polished oak and a steady stream of dried spices. Look for citrus, nectarine, red licorice, coconut oil, ripe banana, and vanilla custard with warming cinnamon and brine. Warm, spicy finish. Very polished!
      		
 
			
 
A blend of two whiskeys; a 6 year old made from 95% rye and a 16 year old made from 80% rye.  These are very high percentages; a straight rye whiskey only needs to contain 51% rye to meet the definition.  It was very clever to marry the vibrancy of a younger whiskey with the depth of a mature whiskey.  Thanks to the high rye content, this whiskey is very spicy, with cinnamon, crisp mint, and fennel.  Underlying sweet notes of caramel, molasses, vanilla, macaroon, cocoa, and candied fruit provide a calming effect and enhance the whiskey's complexity.  But in the end, the rye is the victor, emerging with a vengeance and giving the whisky a bold, warming, spice finish.
      		
 
			
 
This is a good as rye whiskey gets. It’s powerfully spicy, yet there is a calming sweetness along with soft berry and citrus fruit behind the spice. I find its oily texture very soothing, and this also marries beautifully with the spice from the rye and the resinous oak. The flavors are crisp and incredibly clean, and the 18 years in oak has added formidable depth. 

      		
 
			
 
(Previously reviewed in Vol. 15, No. 1.) A wonderfully crisp, clean rye for 18 years old (or any age, for that matter), with incredible depth and balance. A perennial classic. 

      		
 
			
 
This was my second lowest rated whiskey from the 2009 Collection (a 91 rating). This one is an impressive whiskey, and an improvement from last year. It’s soft (for a straight rye), well rounded, and easy to embrace, with tamed spice (cinnamon, mint, vanilla, mocha), nougat, toffee, fruit (bramble, subtle citrus), subtle date, and polished leather on the finish. Buffalo Trace is playing a shell game with this aged rye (being stored in stainless steel tanks over the past several years until new stocks mature), but in this instance there seems to be a prize under every shell. Well done! (Editor's Choice)
-> On page 7 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Still lively for 18 years old, with no hint of interfering oak. The age has softened the rye spice, making it an easy entry into the premium rye category. The balance here is beautiful, with rounded spice (mint, cinnamon, licorice root) on a bed of soft vanilla and caramel. Gently, dry finish. Very sophisticated for a rye. It remains my benchmark for extra-matured rye whiskeys, which are becoming exceedingly scarce. Buffalo Trace Antique Collection 2013 Release.
      		
 
			
 
A benchmark aged rye whiskey, and it’s similar in profile to recent releases . Vibrant for its age. Complex too, brimming with allspice, clove, mint, and cinnamon. The spice notes are balanced by soft vanilla, soothing caramel, and candied summer fruits. Impeccably balanced, and a pure joy to drink!
      		
 
			
 
Very mellow, silky in texture, and on the sweet side for mature bourbon. It’s not bold like Parker’s Heritage Collection 27 year old, which has much more oak spice and resin. Willett’s foundation of molasses and toffee is accentuated by candied fruit, fig, dusty corn, and tobacco, with mint tea, cinnamon, and vanilla peppered throughout. It’s perilously drinkable. I am impressed how these 20-plus year old Willett rye and bourbon whiskeys maintain their balance and keep the oak in check. Splendid ultra-mature bourbon. (Less than 100 bottles of this were sent to California, and not all the same barrel. Happy hunting.) 

      		
 
			
 
A 12 year old blended whisky was created in 1972 consisting of 70 different malt whiskies and 12 grain whiskies.  The blend was then placed in three sherry casks, where it was matured for the next 36 years (highly irregular, to say the least).  The quality of the sherry casks is quite evident, as is the whisky's age.  There's substantial malt content here, too.  These three factors, along with the wide range of malt and grain whiskies, combine to create one of the finest blended Scotch whiskies I have ever tasted.  It's dark, mysterious, and enormously complex, with notes of molasses, fig cake, dried fruit, tobacco, dark chocolate, old pot still rum, and polished leather, finishing with lingering cinnamon and mint.  There's no sign of this whisky getting tired at all.  I am pleased they bottled it at natural strength and didn't water it down to 40% or 43% abv, which could have ruined it.

(Allocation information:  There's a total of 1.347 bottles, of which only 350 are being imported to the U.S.  They are available exclusively at Binny's Beverage Depot (Chicago), Park Avenue Liquors (New York), and Wally's (Los Angeles)).
      		
 
			
 
Would you have gambled The Last Drop 1960 liquid in new sherry wood for four more years? The indulgent nose proffers maple syrup, buckwheat honey, roasted spices, blue grapes, pomegranate, raspberry compote, cilantro, pandan leaf, and beefsteak juices soaking into mushroom gills. The complex, lustrous mouthfeel is replete with a sheen of rich maltiness, molasses lashed by sherry before a dry, resinous finish. Water brings an oily nuttiness, then further drops produce a silky, clingy texture. Glorious. Miraculous. Victorious. (388 bottles only)
      		
 
			
 
Produced at Miyagikyo’s grain distillery from 100% malted barley, this is rich gold in hue, while the nose is big and luscious with plenty of ripe banana, crushed hazelnut, and an intriguing green malt note behind. As it opens, there’s the effect of a high-cocoa chocolate bar melting in your hands, as well as coconut, vanilla fudge, and basil. With water (and it needs it) there’s honey on hot buttered toast. The palate is sumptuous; that banana’s now flambéed. Super ripe and fascinating. A grain for malt lovers. £99. Price in US dollars converted at time of review.
      		
 
			
 
Nikka’s first distillery is located in the eponymous town on the western coast of Hokkaido. Here, power is the key. Deep and rich with a distinct oiliness — somewhere between linseed and cod liver — there’s also plenty of smoke in the mix as well, and a little hint of black olives in brine with ripe apples lurking behind. I hate making comparisons between Japanese and Scotch single malt but if I was forced to, Yoichi reminds me most of Springbank (edging into Longrow). Water dampens the personality too much for me; best have it full-on and uncompromising.
Rather than the palate showing a slow procession of flavors along the tongue, this is a layered whisky; coal-like, oily, and richly fruited with a distinct saltiness on the sides, ably demonstrating that Japan has almost as much variety on offer as scotch. £76.95. Price in US dollars converted at time of review.
      		
 
			
 
A really stunning grain whisky. So rich for a grain whisky, with no excessive oak. Lipsmacking notes of vanilla cream, coconut custard, ripe banana, sticky toffee pudding, rhum agricole, and delicate honeycomb. The flavors are clean, deep, nicely integrated and complex. Single malt drinkers take note: this whisky will change your opinion of grain whisky forever! (A Park Avenue Liquor exclusive.) 

      		
 
			
 
Deep amber color with shade of ruby. Sweet aromas of ripe fruit, oak, caramelized sugar, rum, and creamy vanilla. Full in body for an Irish whiskey, with a silky, creamy texture. Voluptuous flavors of burnt sugar, rum, honeyed fruit, creamy vanilla, and spice cake.

   Style: Irish pure pot still whiskey.Price: approximately $600. Extremely limited availability-around 400 bottles for the United States. 

   Here's a whiskey the blends the old with the new. The whiskey was distilled at the old Midleton distillery, which has been dismantled. After spending most of its life in sherry and bourbon casks, it was then finished off in port pipes. It maintains its Irish-ness, its pot still character is both satisfying and reassuring, and the port pipe aging introduces flavors that make the whiskey very intriguing. An outstanding product!
      		
 
			
 
Make way. The nose is dense, oily, and mesmeric. There’s vanilla, sure, but it’s the intense aroma of vanilla pods split and scraped at knifepoint. Woven around it, there’s crème caramel and heavier cinnamon flaring at the margins, softening with dilution, but remaining sweet. The first Midleton to carry master distiller Brian Nation’s name is purposeful and assured, lacking some of the sappiness of the 2013 release. This is less about succession, more an emphatic statement of intent.
-> On page 8 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The formula for this whisky has changed slightly since its inception -- and I think for the better. They've added some Laphroaig into the mix of Caol Ila and Ardmore. This whisky demonstrates the layered complexity that can be achieved by marrying whisky from different distilleries and different regions. I particularly enjoy the rich maltiness and oily texture that provide firm bedding and flavor contrast to the classic Islay notes: tar, boat docks, brine, smoked olive, seaweed, and kiln ash. More subtle cracked peppercorn, mustard seed, and citrus fruit add complexity. Long, warming finish. Amazing how a small change in composition can significantly benefit the overall flavor profile of a whisky.
      		
 
			
 
You don't mess with the Johnnie Walker brand name casually, so we expect greatness, and boy, do we get it here. This has a dusty, smoky nose with dried apricot and grape, and the whisky is gossamer-soft on the palate, with sweet pear and honey evolving on top of an oaky rich heart before a tidal wave of pepper and peat, and a delightful spice smoke and oak conclusion. Magnificent. 
      		
 
			
 
The pinnacle of the current Johnnie Walker range, this is a rare, inimitable blend of just nine whiskies. It exudes the aromas of ripe bananitos, whole mango, satsuma, vanilla seeds, barley awns, butter biscuits, and crystallized pineapple. The supple grain sustains indulgent, characterful malts creating a weighty, smooth mouthfeel. I’m smitten by the vanilla creaminess, burgeoning deep fruit layers, how it swells with a satisfying snuffbox smokiness. A beautifully styled blend delivering a captivating, sensuous experience. (330 bottles only)
      		
 
			
 
Antique amber color. Mature aromas of candied fruit, ripe berries, and black currants, nicely interwoven with toffee, dates, vanilla, and almonds. Reminiscent of aromas found in a candy shop. Fairly rich body, and smooth. Nice balance of flavors, witha gentle sweetness and oaky dryness throughout. An even-keeled whiskey. There are notes of candied fruit, ripe berries, vanilla, marzipan, and dates, with suggestions of sweet corn, vanilla, charcoal, and cinnamon. Becoming dry with a mature finish. 

      		
 
			
 
A clean, well-rounded bourbon packed with flavor. Deep amber, with tinges of gold. Rich, silky aromas, with thickly textured, seamless flavors on the palate. Incredibly smooth, too, with interwoven notes of toffee, molasses, creamy vanilla, and candy corn. Underlying lush fruit, cinnamon, and fresh mint -- especially on the finish -- round everything out. Some of the previous “extra matured” Wild Turkey whiskeys have occasionally shown their age on the finish, being a little heavy on the oak. Not this one. Nicely done.
      		
 
			
 
A special bottling of Wild Turkey to celebrate Master Distiller Jimmy Russell’s 50 years of being in the bourbon business. Jimmy will be proud to be associated with this bottling. In many ways, this bourbon is a lot like Jimmy: mature, yet with plenty of spunk and character, and a pure joy to be with. This is a big, chewy, full-bodied bourbon with lovely sweet notes (maple syrup, molasses, caramel and candied fruit) balanced by dry spice notes (cigars aged in cedar, evergreen, polished leather). For bourbon drinkers who love intensity in their bourbon. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in French oak chardonnay barrels for eight years after six years in new charred oak. Notes of vanilla, crème brûlée, butterscotch, toasted coconut, bright fruit, and polished oak. Clean, gently sweet finish. The chardonnay oak aging adds a new dimension without dominating. A distinctive, stylish whisky with excellent balance. 

      		
 
			
 
The barrel was heated to 102°F for 23 minutes to dry the wood. A lush, silky-textured bourbon and very seductive. Caramel, coconut cream, marzipan, vanilla wafer and bright honeyed fruit abound, while teasing notes of tobacco, anise, subtle mint and a suggestion of bitter chocolate offer intrigue. A broad-shouldered, heavyweight bourbon with plenty of grit. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in French oak barrels, in which the staves were air-dried for 24 months. Incredibly rich notes of caramel, chewy toffee, and maple syrup. All this sweetness is balanced nicely by firm, polished oak, and the whiskey is kept lively with delicate candied fruit and crisp mint. Dry, elegant finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in slow-growth wood. I love the balance in this whiskey, with all the flavors presented harmoniously. Rather lively for a bourbon approaching 15 years. Notes of bright fruit (peach, kiwi, golden raisin), soft vanilla, crème caramel, lemon meringue, and coconut macaroon, then drying out nicely to a rather sophisticated, cinnamon-tinged, polished oak finish.
-> On page 9 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Buffalo Trace distilled a wheated bourbon and aged barrels from the same distillation date on three different floors (1, 5 and 9) for 12 ½ years to see what the differences would be. This is similar to an experiment they conducted last year using a rye mashbill bourbon. As you will see, the higher the floor, the more intense the flavors, and the greater the wood influence.

Nicely balanced flavors, and complex. Spices dance on the palate (cinnamon, clove, nutmeg), balanced by underlying caramel and butterscotch, and subtle honeyed orchard fruit. Lingering, well-rounded finish. A fabulous wheated bourbon!  Price is per 375 ml. Editor's Choice.
      		
 
			
 
Deep amber with shades of copper. Background notes of spearmint, marzipan, teaberry, and cinnamon compliment mature, exotic aromas of ripe candied fruit, vanilla, molasses, and leather. Thick, chewy body. Flavors of candied sweetness and ripe fruit up front, yielding to molasses, subtle spices and, ultimately, dry leather. Long, warming, contemplative finish. 

      		
 
			
 
While labeled as a 17 year old, it’s actually 19, distilled way back in 1988. Each year’s release of this whiskey just seems to get better and better. Some of the earlier vintages turned slightly oaky and dry for balance (the 10 year old Single Barrel Eagle Rare whiskeys did too a while back), but Buffalo Trace just keeps on improving the line. Tight, well-balanced notes of molasses, vanilla, candied fruit, and sweet corn, peppered with crisp mint, cinnamon, and polished leather. Eagle Rare 17 is evolving into a whiskey of classic proportion.

      		
 
			
 
The other whiskeys in the Antique Collection get all the attention but, for the past few years, Eagle Rare 17 year old has been very impressive. This year’s edition features vanilla taffy, caramel almonds, maple syrup, and candy corn, with balancing notes of polished leather, summer fruit, a dusting of cinnamon, mocha, and soft mint. The flavors are nicely integrated with good depth. A rock-solid effort that will not disappoint.
      		
 
			
 
Usually the least talked-about in the Antique Collection, but in my opinion certainly of the same caliber. This year’s release proves my point: nutty toffee and rummy molasses notes balanced nicely with dried fruit, cinnamon, polished oak, subtle leather, and tobacco. The oak is kept in check for such an age, and all the flavors work well together. Nicely done!
      		
 
			
 
Often overlooked in this portfolio because it isn’t barrel proof. The last few years of this bourbon have been wonderful. This year is no exception, with a bit more spice. Notes of nutty toffee, caramel, creamy vanilla, and pot still rum, with interwoven hints of oak resin, dried spice, tobacco, and honeyed fruit. Hint of barrel char and anise for intrigue. Delicious! (And actually 19 years old, even though it bears the traditional 17 year age statement.) Buffalo Trace Antique Collection 2013 Release.
      		
 
			
 
The 11th annual vintage release of Evan Williams and, judging by the taste of this bourbon, there’s no shortage of excellent bourbon to bottle. This is a rich, seductive bourbon. Sticky toffee, maple syrup, and vanilla cream notes up front are followed by candied fruit, refreshing mint, and spicy cinnamon. Dry, resinous oak finish. Kentucky’s answer to a beautifully sherried Speyside single malt scotch. Outstanding! 

      		
 
			
 
The first release of Stagg was our 'American Whiskey of the Year' for 2003. I couldn’t imagine this one being better, but it is. This is a textbook example of what older, more mature bourbon should taste like: great depth and maturity, yet nicely balanced without excessive woodiness on the palate. It is spicier and creamier on the nose than the first bottling with more vanilla tones and not quite as dry on the finish. Indeed, it hints of a softer, gentler side. But with a name like Stagg, it can be nothing more than a hint. Other flavors you’ll enjoy in this bourbon include spearmint, teaberry, candied fruit, leather, and toffee. Given its high proof and reasonable price, it’s also a great value. (Like Campbell’s soup, just add water.)
      		
 
			
 
Very close to last year’s release in personality, with great balance between the sweetness, spice, and fruit. Nicely structured, with clearly defined notes of toffee, molasses, cinnamon, vanilla bean, dried citrus, brittle mint, roasted nuts, tobacco, and polished leather on the finish. (Editor's Choice)
      		
 
			
 
Thicker, beefier and more decadent than the 61.3% bottling, but not as crisp. Less of the summer fruits, and more of the chewy toffee. Another fine effort!
-> On page 10 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Single cask Aberfeldy bottlings are very few and far between, and this is a stunner! After hogshead maturation the whisky ultimately underwent a period of finishing in an ex-sherry cask prior to bottling. The nose offers sultanas, raisins, and hot chocolate. Developing vanilla and a hint of over-ripe bananas. Finally, burnt sugar and caramel. Insinuating and syrupy on the palate, with apricots, dried fruits, honey, and sherry. Gently spicy and warming, with licorice in the notably long finish. £115
      		
 
			
 
Cask #3524 is darker, with notes of sticky toffee pudding and chewy caramel that firmly support the polished leather, cigar box, roasted chestnut, smoked seaweed, tar, dark chocolate, and, on the finish, espresso. A meditative whisky. 
Price listed includes entire Double Barrel 1974 Vintage set.
      		
 
			
 
Very spicy and complex, with incredible depth. Once again, this 30-plus year old whisky proves the aging ability of Balvenie. Still quite vibrant and invigorating for such maturity. The classic Balvenie honey note is there, but more reserved, along with graham cracker, vanilla wafer, citrus peel, raspberry (red and black), nectarine, and polished oak. Long, spicy finish. Another outstanding Balvenie Vintage Cask. Although, I look at the price and remember how shocked I was when the Balvenie vintages were selling for $400.

      		
 
			
 
A combination of three sherry butts and seven bourbon casks. This is a complex, dynamic whisky, loaded with lush, layered ripe fruit (red berries, tropical fruit, honeyed apricot, raisin), toffee, oak resin, polished leather, and well-defined spice notes (cinnamon, vanilla, nutmeg, clove). Long, warming finish. (Exclusive to the U.S.) 
      		
 
			
 
Lush, thick fruit and chewy toffee soothes the assertive notes of earthy peat and leafy bonfire. Underlying smoked nuts, brine, kalamata olives, and tobacco provide continued entertainment. A complex whisky that completely envelops the palate. This is an excellent example of a mature, sherried Bowmore. 

      		
 
			
 
I like this Bowmore better than all the previous bourbon oak-aged, ultra-mature Bowmore whiskies that have been released over the past fifteen years (there have been several). The oak is always present, but not dominant. The whisky really evolves on the palate, just like the Black Bowmore releases. This emphasis here is on fruit, bright fruit: peach, tangerine, mango, ripe melon, and pineapple. There’s a soft, gentle side to the whisky, too, enhanced by sweeter notes of pancake syrup, orange creamsicle, and white chocolate. Heavy oak notes emerge, along with teasing, earthy smoke, to give the whisky depth and bottom notes. The smoke and oak linger long on the finish. Very contemplative. In short, an outstanding whisky, but not quite reaching the excellence of Black Bowmore. 

   (Allocation information: 732 bottles available worldwide; 40 bottles are being allocated for the U.S., half of the quantity of Black Bowmore which was released earlier this year.)

      		
 
			
 
Previous Broras in the Diageo Special Release series have set the bar remarkably high, and this, the eleventh such bottling, does not disappoint. The component whiskies were distilled during 1976 and 1977 and matured in refill American oak casks. The nose offers lemon and contrasting vanilla and honeycomb aromas. Musty malt and coal in the background. The citrus and honey themes continue into the slightly earthy, peppery palate, while French mustard and coal figure in the drying finish. 1,566 bottles.
      		
 
			
 
Just 160 bottles of 1972 Brora are available through UK World of Whiskies and World Duty Free Group stores. The oldest bottling of Brora to date was distilled using heavily-peated malt. A big hit of oily peat on the early nose, with malt, dried fruit, and black pepper. Mildly medicinal. The palate yields bonfire ash, licorice, honey, more pepper, and well-integrated oak. The finish is long, with peat smoke, plain chocolate, and tannins lingering in harmony. Complex and rewarding. £7,000
      		
 
			
 
This is the 13
 annual release of Brora, which has been aged in refill American oak and refill European oak casks. Hessian and hemp on the early nose, with a whiff of ozone, discreet peat, and old tar. Fragrant and fruity notes develop, with ripe apples, and a hint of honey. The palate is waxy, sweet, and spicy, with heather and ginger. Mildly medicinal and smoky. Dries steadily in the finish to aniseed, black pepper, dark chocolate, and fruity tannins. (2,964 bottles)
      		
 
			
 
The sixth and last bottling from the Legacy series. Legacy 6 is a marriage of six casks from 1965, 1970, and 1972. Soft and mellow on the nose and palate, with unbelievably restrained oak for such a mature whisky. Delicious notes of coconut, soothing vanilla, caramel custard, and banana cream, peppered with spice notes of cinnamon, mint, and teaberry that emerge on a soft finish that fades out gently. A fitting end to the Legacy series. I’m sad to see them go. 

-> On page 11 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Bottled to celebrate the 125th Anniversary of the distillery. Classic Bunnahabhain-toffeed and quite nutty. Almost rummy in nature, with rich molasses notes throughout and layers of sweetness. Some salt emerges on occasion, as do notes of honey, coconut, and candied fruit, with a pleasingly dry, gently spicy finish to round everything out. Surprisingly youthful for its age, nicely balanced, and very drinkable. A great Bunnahabhain! 

      		
 
			
 
For the past several years, the Stillman’s Dram expression of The Dalmore has been a 30 year old. This new 28 year old expression, besides being two years younger, is also slightly less sherried. In this instance, I feel that both have enhanced the whisky. Trimming back on the sherry and oak allows the whisky’s trademark orange marmalade, complex spice, and briny freshness to shine through. This one is lively, dynamic, evolving, well-balanced, and always entertaining. The best Dalmore Stillman’s Dram in years. 

      		
 
			
 
Matured entirely in oloroso sherry butts, this whisky is chock-full of lush fruit, roasted nuts, deep spice notes, and a hint of damp smoke. It is wonderfully integrated, with incredible depth and maturity without being tired-and it expresses a soothing quality that doesn’t quit. It is stunning throughout and more polished and rounded than the 1968 Vintage released a while back, which, while enjoyable, was a tad sappy and a bit too oaky at times. This whisky is easily one of the 10 best new whiskies for 2005, and worth every penny. Get a bottle while you can. 

      		
 
			
 
The new ultra-mature release, following its 33 year old predecessor (bottled by previous owners). It’s nice to see the higher ABV, given that the 33 year old was only 40%. Very soothing. Quite deep on the nose and viscous (almost sappy) on the palate, with gobs of juicy oak and old oak (its age is obvious but not imposing), dark raisin, black raspberry, orange marmalade, roasted nuts, and freshly roasted coffee beans. All of this is peppered with cinnamon, ginger, and charcoal. Polished leather on the finish. I like that it’s sherried, and the sherry is kept in balance. Those of you who liked the 33 year old will also enjoy this one (assuming you can afford it).
      		
 
			
 
This is the bomb. Savory and lightly meaty, but sweetened by plum sauce; there’s even some strawberry around the fringes. You could see how with another 30 years this would end up like the ’54. Elegant yet powerful, there’s sandalwood incense, marmalade, even a little dried mango. The distillery’s density is balanced by this fruit. Lush with supple tannins and at its best neat. From a refill butt, this is an exemplary sherried malt. £230
      		
 
			
 
Aged in sherry butts, which is a departure from some of the older Glengoyne vintage samples I have which show more bourbon barrel characteristics. It is a very fruity, spicy, textural dram, with spiced apple, red raspberry, strawberry, plum, golden raisin, fried plantain, and creme brulee. Good grip on the finish, with grape stems and warming spice (cinnamon, cracked peppercorn, and clove). I love the balance on this whisky. It has aged very gracefully. (Limited to 250 bottles worldwide.)
      		
 
			
 
Rummy molasses and toffee sweetness intertwine with roasted nuts and bright, juicy fruit. Suggestions of fig, lavender, leather, and tobacco throughout, with a hint of peat and polished oak on the finish. Not quite as refined as the Highland Park 18 year old, but it makes up for this with its dynamic personality. A delicious ultra-mature, sherry cask-aged whisky. (A Binny’s Beverage Depot exclusive.) 

      		
 
			
 
A delicious, well-balanced, ultra-matured expression of Highland Park. Toffee apples, molasses, and vanilla fudge provide a sweet foundation, with evolving notes of dark chocolate, dry spicy oak, tobacco, subtle smoke, and lingering brine on the finish. Nicely done. (Bottled for Old Oaks Cigar & Wine Company) 

      		
 
			
 
An essay in elegance. Silky and soft in texture, and very clean. Notes of peaches and cream, vanilla wafer, soft honey and fruit gum drops. Subtler notes of tropical fruit (pineapple, lemon, coconut), demerara sugar, heather, and anise. Polished oak adds structure and contrast, with a very elegant finish. Hard to believe this whisky is 32 years old. It's lighter and more elegant than the equally splendid Highland Park 30 year old, which I rated a 94 in the last issue. (Bottled exclusively for Park Avenue Liquors.)
      		
 
			
 
An exemplary Highland Park. There's certainly plenty of sherry influence in this whisky and it is complementary. (About 2/3 of the whisky was aged on sherry casks, and a lot of these casks were second fill.) The whisky enjoys a delicious foundation of toffee, fruit (lemon, plum, blueberries) and dark chocolate. It continues to develop and evolve on the palate, with emerging notes of heather, nougat, lavender, delicate peat and complex dried spice (especially cinnamon and nutmeg) to balance the sweeter notes. The extra alcohol is also a bonus, providing a drying balance to the whisky's sweetness. Whiskies like this one remind me why I fell in love with whisky in the first place.
-> On page 12 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
A marriage of two casks (refill hogsheads). Significantly darker in color than the 1968 vintage. Darker (and more serious) in personality, too. Red berries (strawberry, raspberry), rhubarb, plum, oak sap, vanilla bean, smoldering peat, coffee grounds, toasted almond, and dusty malt. The finish is long and contemplative, with notes of polished leather, juicy oak, and telicherry peppercorns. £3,750
      		
 
			
 
This limited edition bottling consists of a marriage of both European and American oak. Still lively for its age, and beautifully balanced. Bountiful golden fruit (sultana, pineapple upside down cake, tangerine, overripe nectarine) balanced by soothing, creamy vanilla. A peppering of dried spice, chamomile tea, toasted oak, cigar box, and subtle smoke round out the palate. Soft and seductive. (Not available in the U.S.)£2,250
      		
 
			
 
Introduced to the Highland Park portfolio in 1997. Gentle peat, soft toffee, floral notes, and honey on the beautifully fragrant nose.  Superbly balanced on the velvety palate, with brittle toffee, stewed fruits, peat, honey, and a hint of coffee. Smoke and more toffee mingle in the long, elegant finish. 
      		
 
			
 
There’s precious little reticence about this beast, which leaps out of the glass blowing peat smoke everywhere — then comes raffia, Lapsang Souchong tea, seashore, wet rocks, Elastoplast, talcum powder, bog myrtle (laurel), vetiver, and the aromas of a just-expunged peat bonfire with apples baking on it. Huge and complex, in other words.
The palate starts with a fug of smoke being belched at you (non-peat freaks look away, now) then distinct saltiness enlivens the tongue before everything plunges down; intense sweetness takes charge for a moment before it shifts into charred creosoted timbers. 
This begs for some water, and when it’s added, out comes sandalwood and peat smoke and tar and an orris root-like character — it’s not often I get gin-like notes on Lagavulin, but it’s here — which rolls over you as you roll over and succumb to its power. After this year’s sublime distillery-only bottling, it’s clear that Lagavulin is in a real purple patch. Superb. 
      		
 
			
 
An old classic, but how do the newest bottlings fare? Rich, chewy, slightly oily texture. Deep peat, thick smoke, iodine, brine, charcoal, seaweed, tea (Earl Grey, Lapsang Souchong), and the aromas of a summer barbeque. Vanilla and light caramel soften the intensity, while subtle citrus fruit teases. Powerful, yet polished and seamless. After all these years, this whisky is still one of the finest standard-issue peaty, smoky whiskies! 
      		
 
			
 
Another of the Fine Oak series (aged in both bourbon and sherry casks), which will debut in the U.S. in March. Of the five Fine Oak expressions that will be in the U.S. (10, 15, 17, 21, and 30 year old), this is my favorite, slightly besting the 15 year old. Lovely sweet notes (creamy vanilla, light toffee, marshmallow, shortbread, and a kiss of honey) are accompanied by bright fruit (multi-layered citrus) and potpourri of dried spices, along with a hint of nut and wisp of smoke. A very refined and sophisticated whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Antique amber. The darkest and most decadent of the four. Quite viscous and soothing, with well-layered notes of apple pie, marmalade, and maple syrup balanced by dried fruits, ginger, polished leather, tobacco, and resinous oak. One to sip and savor very slowly. (This whisky is much better than the last ultra-premium release, the Macallan 55 year old in the Lalique Decanter, and thousands of dollars less.)  

      		
 
			
 
Incredibly soft and mellow for a rye whiskey, with no signs of excessive oak. This whiskey is obviously of the same pedigree as the Willett Rye 22 year old bottling reviewed here a year ago. It’s another impressive whiskey. Light toffee, nougat, and rummy notes are accentuated by crisp mint, cinnamon, nutmeg, and Earl Grey tea. Pristine on the palate, with lingering cinnamon warmth on the finish. A polished whiskey, with surprising subtlety and finesse. At 137 proof, it’s like getting a third of a bottle free!
      		
 
			
 
Drier than the 12 year old (reviewed below), with some darker fruit (black raspberry, blueberry) marrying with the brighter orchard fruit.  Sweet up front - honey and caramel - with a peppering of spice (dried vanilla, clove, and cinnamon) increasing as the palate develops.  Dry, oak spice finish.  Lovely! 

      		
 
			
 
A whopping three-quarters of the spirit put in these casks was taken by greedy angels. It has a big waft of crystallized pineapple, tropical fruits, and spiky spice on the nose. On the palate, red licorice, syrupy jellied fruits, some mandarin, cherry lozenge, and tinned strawberries, and the same menthol rancio you’d kill for in a 30 year old scotch. This is Amrut's oldest-ever whisky; it's as rare as hen's teeth…and just 8 years old. Awesome. 
-> On page 13 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Well, what have we here? A blend of 50% malt and 50% grain (a very high malt content for a blend), and bottled at 50%, too! The whisky was blended first (very unusual), before being aged in sherry casks for its entire life. Antique amber/chestnut color. Full sherry impact, but never cloying -- the higher alcohol level and grain whisky cut through the sherry and add balance and drinkability. This is a fruity-confection delight, with raisin chutney, fig cake, orange almond scone, and chocolate-covered cherry. Add to the mix richly textured toffee, old oak, polished leather, and a cinnamon-spiced tobacco finish. A rare treat! A great old blend that malt drinkers will embrace.
      		
 
			
 
Wow! Could this be the greatest comeback since Rocky climbed back in the ring and showed the young upstarts who was the boss? It’s taken Irish Distillers a long time to respond to the pounding it’s taken from Cooley but it’s back in the ring with two wonderful pot still whiskeys. This is the better of the two, a whopping oily, woody package of classic pot still Irishness. The green fruits tumble over tannin and spice like frisky puppies. €55 (Currently not available in the U.S.)Editor's Choice
      		
 
			
 
This new single barrel expression of Knob Creek tastes very similar to the original “small batch” Knob Creek (when brought down to the same alcohol level). If anything, it’s slightly drier, more elegant, not as heavy on the palate, and more sophisticated — but I am reaching here. The similarity is a good thing, because I really enjoy the original expression. Keeping in mind that no two barrels are exactly alike, your decision to purchase the single barrel might just come down to whether you want to pay a little more for a higher strength version, and whether knowing that it might taste a little different than the standard small batch bottling excites you. This is a stylish, big, broad-shouldered bourbon with a thick, sweet foundation (nutty toffee, pot still rum, maple syrup) peppered with spice (cinnamon, but also vanilla and evergreen) and dried fruit. Dry, warming, resinous finish. (Incidentally, I would rate the small batch within a point or two, and the tasting notes would be very similar.)
      		
 
			
 
This is the pick of the bunch, the whisky equivalent of Fountains of Wayne; an effervescent dessert whisky, which from the first aroma to the final finish is a consistent mix of vanilla, coconut, and overripe banana, sprinkled with icing sugar and cinnamon.
      		
 
			
 
Surprisingly reserved on the oak spice; it tastes like a bourbon half its age. Soothing in nature, with layers of sweetness (honey, vanilla cream, caramel, nougat), lively complex fruit (coconut, pineapple, ripe peach, honeydew melon), and gentle cinnamon. Soft, creamy finish. A whiskey that has aged very gracefully. Delicious! (This is a single barrel; every barrel is unique.)
      		
 
			
 
A seamless fusion of rain-moistened earth, gunnysacks, and searing white pepper underpins the delicately bitter grain-like notes of fresh-baked rye bread. Lilacs and violets speak of rye grain, as do delicate cloves and tingling ginger, while dark stewed fruits attest to age. A mingling of hand-selected barrels of 10 year old all rye whisky, Masterson’s is redolent of vintage car leather and kiln-dried burley tobacco, with touches of dry herbs and spearmint. Sweet vanilla envelops early butterscotch.
      		
 
			
 
If you want proof that blended malts can be world class, you'll find it in any bottle of Blue Hanger. Lovingly created by Berry Bros. whisky maker Doug McIvor, every release has been exceptional. Even by the series’ own high standards, this sixth release surpasses itself. The nose is fresh, clean, and citrusy, with wafts of sherry. But there are smoky hints, too. And it's that peaty, earthy note on the palate that gives this release a new dimension, enriching the fruity Speyside sweetness at the whisky's core. The age and quality of the malt asserts itself throughout. This really is stunning stuff. £68
      		
 
			
 
Distilled from 90% rye grain and 10% rye malt, Lot No. 40 boldly mingles the galvanizing piquancy of distilled rye grain with the soaring floral fragrance of malted rye, and a fruitiness born of age. It begins with hard, dusty, earthy rye, and sour rye bread, followed by a trio of baking spices: cloves, nutmeg, and blistering ginger. A farm-tinged sourness fades into citrus fruit with velvet tannins. (Canada only)C$40
      		
 
			
 
Corby’s latest Lot 40, this one undated, comes from the same distillation batch as the 2012 release, but with a couple of extra years in wood. The familiar flavors are all there: dustiness, sour rye, hard wet slate, floral notes, exotic fruits, sweet spices, and biting white pepper. Over these, time has sprinkled licorice root, dried dates, oatmeal porridge, vanilla, hints of bike tires, and mango peels. Flavors remain fully integrated with faint tannins underscoring a long sour-rye finish. Value Pick.
      		
 
			
 
From the nose you can tell this is a special whisky, with old, dark, lacquered wood, dusty cigar box, and sea salt combined with dark sweet cherry and a hint of 
. On the palate it gets even better, with lush, dark cherry perfectly balanced and integrated with oak spice, salt, and peat smoke. There’s clear 
 in the center of it all that's utterly delicious. This stunner finishes with a long, slightly spicy, and entirely lovely finish. (
)
-> On page 14 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Each fall, whisky lovers in Canada and Texas anticipate John Hall’s new limited edition whisky. This year’s sits squarely in the golden heart of classic Canadian rye. Tingling gingery pepper is bathed in ultra-creamy butterscotch, woody maple syrup, black tea, and barley sugar. Prune juice and ripe dark fruits dissolve into dried apricots and zesty hints of citrus. Then floral rye notes turn dusty, with gentle wisps of willow smoke. Complex, full-bodied, and slowly evolving, so let it breathe. C$70
      		
 
			
 
Wonderfully complex on the nose and palate with great depth; plus, the oak is kept in check. Notes of molasses, graham cracker, Earl Grey tea, spring flowers, nougat, evergreen, warming cinnamon, and subtle tropical fruit, leading to a polished oak, charcoal-tinged finish. Very well done! The clear winner in this trio. 

      		
 
			
 
Finished in a rum cask. Very creamy, with a soothing sweetness. Notes of vanilla, demerara sugar, nougat, and subtle tropical fruit (coconut, pineapple, mango) coat the palate. All this is balanced nicely by resinous oak and a peppering of dried spices that linger on the finish. The rum finish, along with the 46% bottling strength, adds backbone and flair. One of the best whiskeys to come out of Cooley. (A Park Avenue Liquor exclusive.) 

      		
 
			
 
This has long been a core whisky for Compass Box, but the latest version of it is spicier and fresher than I recall, and without doubt, it's my new best friend. Virgin French oak heads help to contribute oriental and aromatic spices on the nose, with hints of melon and pineapple candy sweets. The taste is a delight, with spearmint, soft toffee, sweet citrus fruit, lemonade mixed with beer, and strawberry wafers. An array of spices from cinnamon to chili to ginger dominate the finish.
      		
 
			
 
Jim Beveridge delivered these aromas of toffee apple, peach, and rich berry fruits by working with European oak casks. The smoke is timid, with hints of background salinity. The finely structured mouthfeel is where this triple malt whisky truly shines: the polished smoothness is exceptional. The flavor journey begins with honey, citrus, and swirling melted chocolate, building to a fire of squeezed orange oils, dry fruits, and pecan nuttiness before concluding with rich espresso, dark caramels, and plain chocolate. Immaculate.
      		
 
			
 
Bright gold. Amazingly fresh fruits and quince, slowly evolving into mango, blueberry, and a jammy tayberry note. At the same time, exotic spices like cardamom begin to build, particularly when the surface is broken with a drop of water, while vanilla pod notes develop. In the mouth, the grain smooths all the elements, giving an unctuous feel. There’s just sufficient oakiness to give structure and any smoke is far in the distance.  A triumph of the blender’s art. £100,000
      		
 
			
 
Black Bottle is unique in that it combines seven different Islay whiskies with grain whisky. This produces a whisky with a beautifully rounded Islay character that will satisfy the discriminating “peat-head,” the drinkability of a blended scotch, and plenty of complexity. For a blend, there’s heft to the whisky. I enjoy the interplay between the peat smoke, brine, seaweed, its firm, malty foundation and pleasingly dry finish. 

      		
 
			
 
The last new Chivas release was the 25 year old several years back. To be honest, I didn’t like it as much as Chivas 18 year old. Those extra years contributed an additional dry oak influence which I felt was a bit too dominant—especially on the finish. So you can imagine my concerns before tasting this 38 year old whisky. But this new Royal Salute has something to balance the dry oak that the 25 year old didn’t—lush, rich, sweet sherry notes. It’s quite fruity, with toffee apple, date nut cake, fig, molasses, and golden raisin up front, evolving to dried fruit, pencil shavings, tobacco, and polished leather, with subtle cinnamon and cocoa on the finish. My favorite of the entire Chivas line is the 18 year old (which I rated a 95) for its impeccable balance, but this is still a very impressive whisky!
      		
 
			
 
Thick, dark, sweet notes of rummy molasses, chewy toffee, fig cake, and some teasing notes of chocolate fudge. Between these layers of sweetness emerge notes of dark berried fruit and glazed citrus. A very seductive, compelling whiskey. Liquid dessert. 

      		
 
			
 
A significant improvement over the previous release in 2007, which I felt was the weakest of Buffalo Trace’s Antique Collection that year. Wheated bourbons, like William Larue Weller, lack the bold zing of rye, and therefore are vulnerable to being too tame, too easygoing, like the 2007 release. What wheated whiskeys gain in drinkability, they can lose in vibrancy and zest. The distiller might want to augment this, and a good way to do this is by increasing the oak impact (spice, resin, balancing dryness), as was done (quite masterfully, by the way) with this new expression. Sweet notes of vanilla custard, maple syrup, Demerara rum, shortbread cookie, and marzipan are balanced by raspberry jam, cinnamon, nutmeg, teaberry, and gentle oak resin that lingers on the finish. Great balance, too!

-> On page 15 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Deep amber color. Rich, mature aroma of molasses, maple syrup, and leather, with background notes of creamy vanilla, tobacco, and subtle mint. Full, thick, mouth-coating body. Sweet up front (molasses, maple syrup, rich toffee, candied fruit), becoming spicy (vanilla, mint) and then dry with notes of leather and tobacco. Long, dry finish. 

      		
 
			
 
I really enjoy these older Eagle Rare whiskeys. They’re big, hearty whiskies that are very traditional in style, but have extra depth on the palate due to the extensive aging. Sweet notes (candy corn and toffee) meld nicely with underlying nuttiness (pecans, almonds), delicate spice (vanilla, cinnamon, mint), and a hint of leather. One of the best Eagle Rares I have ever tasted. 

      		
 
			
 
The only setback from last year’s Antique Collection release, when I rated it an 84 because it was showing too much wood (especially compared to the 2007-2008 releases). The 2010 release is back on track, with great balance, and showing very traditional notes of vanilla toffee, rummy molasses, dusty corn, soft summer fruit, and a sprinkling of spice (cinnamon, mint, cocoa), with oak resin to balance out the sweet notes. (Editor's Choice)
      		
 
			
 
The most underrated of the five in the 2011 collection, but this year’s release (like last year’s) is very lovely bourbon. Perhaps just a bit softer than last year, but with a similar profile: very even keeled and nicely balanced, with sweet notes (vanilla, toffee, añejo rum) peppered with soft orchard fruit and spice (cocoa, cinnamon, nutmeg, hint of mint), polished oak, and subtle tobacco. 
      		
 
			
 
Silky smooth. Lush honey notes married with bright orchard fruit and candied tropical fruit. Soft vanilla, mint, and cinnamon round out the palate.  Seamless and perilously drinkable. Proof that a bourbon doesn’t have to be old, high in alcohol, or expensive to be good. Editor's Choice & Value Pick
      		
 
			
 
Polished and nicely balanced, with caramel as the main note, followed by candied fruit, soft vanilla, sweet corn, and nougat. Subtle spice (ginger, cinnamon) and gentle oak on the finish round out the sweet notes. Easygoing demeanor and very drinkable. Great value too! A very pleasing, versatile bourbon. Value Pick.
      		
 
			
 
Elegant, clean, and peppered with dried spice notes throughout (cinnamon, nutmeg, allspice). Additional notes of barrel char, vanilla wafer, summer fruits, caramel corn, maple syrup, and candied almond add complexity. Begins sweet, but dries out nicely on the finish, inviting another sip. Very nice! 
      		
 
			
 
Crisp clove, cool mint, cinnamon, and cocoa mingle with glazed orange, honeyed vanilla, caramel, and maple syrup. Polished oak and leather on the finish balance the sweet, fruity notes. More oak and dried spice when compared to the 2013 release (our American Whiskey of the Year) and, while not quite reaching that caliber (it’s not quite as seamless, drinkable, or complex), it gets close. Very impressive.
      		
 
			
 
Antique amber color. Thick, mature aromas of toffee, leather, candied fruit, and mint. The aromas are tightly bound at cask strength but open up with a bit of water to reveal spicy wood resins and a hint of tobacco. Thick, almost chewy in texture. Its flavors are similar to its aroma (and nicely balanced), with the sweeter notes (toffee, candied fruit) up front and the drier, more spicy notes (mint, wood resins, leather) beginning in the middle and continuing to its finish. A lovely balance of flavors and not one bit too old or woody. 

      		
 
			
 
The fourth limited release Stagg in as many years. While there’s no age statement on the bottle, this one is 16 years old. And in the same vein as its three predecessors, this Stagg is an extremely seamless affair. What impresses me most about the annual Stagg releases is the whiskey’s incredible drinkability at remarkably high alcohol levels. Be stingy when adding water to this whiskey to appreciate its soothingly smooth, oily texture and lovely notes of maple syrup, vanilla cream, dried corn, candied fruit, polished oak, supple leather, pencil shavings, and subtle mint. 

-> On page 16 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
No age statement, but this whiskey was distilled in 1992. At 144.8 proof, this is almost two whiskeys for the price of one. In true Stagg form, this whiskey is dangerously drinkable -- even at higher strength (although you will still need to add copious quantities of water to this supercharged whiskey). Its dominant character is chewy toffee sweetness with maple syrup, vanilla fudge, and nougat. Additional notes of berried fruit, tea, spearmint, and suggestions of tobacco. Very soothing. An incredible value, considering its strength.
      		
 
			
 
I’ve tasted several batches of this whiskey (made at the old Stitzel-Weller distillery), from the inaugural Batch #1 when it was a 17 year old, to this new release. It’s not surprising that they taste progressively older. My favorite is still the first batch, but this whiskey holds up nicely and shows a similar flavor profile with a bit more wood influence: blackberry jam, nutty toffee, nougat, creamy vanilla, cinnamon, and a touch of polished oak on the finish. Nice texture, too, with good viscosity and grip on the finish.
      		
 
			
 
A soothing bourbon, with maple syrup, blackberry preserve, polished leather, roasted nuts, marzipan, vanilla toffee, dusty dates, subtle tobacco, and a hint of pedro ximinez sherry. Soft, flavorful finish. The oak is kept in check, with layered sugars and fruit for balance. The price of admission is steep, but this whiskey is very satisfying.
      		
 
			
 
Style: Bourbon Color: Antique amber Aroma: Thick, lush, very complex and nicely balanced. Notes of polished leather and oak marry nicely with the toffee and caramel. Tobacco, raisins, and dates, add complexity and diversity. Palate: Bold and voluptuous, with notes similar to its aroma. Long, soothing finish.

   General Comments: A big, broad-shouldered bourbon jam-packed with flavors that just won't quit. Most bourbons of this age and intensity are too woody. Not this one. It is very well-balanced from beginning to end. Bravo! Price: upper $30s. Available nationwide but produced in limited quantities.
      		
 
			
 
Fully matured at 15 years, as you would expect. Lovely array of flavors: candied fruit, cinnamon, nutmeg, gritty oak resins, vanilla fudge, and firm corn. Underlying notes of tobacco and polished leather add complexity and intrigue without dominating, kissed with a touch of honey. A remarkable value, considering its age and strength. 

      		
 
			
 
Similar in many ways to the 15. Less vibrant, more mature. Less corn, more maple syrup. Less nutmeg, more teaberry. The most elegant, sexy and stylish of the three and the best dovetailing of flavors. You might think that $90 is a lot of money for bourbon, but this whiskey is fairly valued when compared to other spirits of this age. 

      		
 
			
 
Soft, sweet, and very smooth. Richly textured layers of caramel, toffee, vanilla fudge, nougat, maple syrup, and rhum agricole. Blackberry, date nut bread, cinnamon, subtle cocoa, and nutmeg add complexity. Clean, polished, and perilously drinkable. A delicious wheated bourbon! (Not quite the complexity of the 2009 William Larue Weller (a benchmark wheated bourbon which I rated a 96), but getting close.
      		
 
			
 
Straw-gold color. On the nose, sweet toffee, citrus notes, seaweed, and spice complement a powerful peat smoke infusion. In body, it is thick and oily. On the palate, a somewhat sweet maltiness up front is run over by a powerful peat smoke locomotive. Again, the whisky is enriched with citrus and pear notes, spice, and seaweed. The finish is powerful, long, and warming. The smoke lingers for minutes, if not hours.

   Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: high $30s. Available nationwide. 

   If you like your Ardbeg to go to a phenolic extreme, you will cherish this one. This big, powerful whisky makes no apologies for its Islay roots. And the fact that this whisky is bottled at 46% ABV just makes this big whisky even bigger.
      		
 
			
 
The newest offering from the impressive Balvenie vintage cask line. Honey, caramel custard, and Seville orange notes, with evolving -- and increasingly noticeable -- dried spice, oak resin, and leather that integrates well with the sweet, fruity notes. Incredible depth and complexity. The Balvenie vintage reputation remains intact.
      		
 
			
 
The last Balvenie Vintage whisky I tasted that was this old was the exceptional 1966 Vintage. This new vintage has some big shoes (or should I say bottles?) to fill, so how does it stand up to the 1966 Vintage? This 1973 Vintage is equally as impressive. In contrast to the massive, evolving, sherry-influenced 30 year old reviewed below, this one shows more subtlety and finesse. It is also a very clean and polished affair-signs of an obviously excellent cask. A honeyed, malty foundation incorporates notes of dried fruit (orange, lemon), complex spice (vanilla, cinnamon, sandalwood), and subtle herbs. Very contemplative. 

-> On page 17 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Deep amber color. Exotic aromas of honey, vanilla, and tropical fruit (coconut, pineapple, mango). Medium to full in body, and rich in texture. The palate delivers what the aroma promises-honey, vanilla, and more tropical fruit, with a somewhat dry and rather lengthy finish. The Balvenie distillery enjoys an excellent reputation. The older expressions are particularly noteworthy. They age very gracefully. This one is a pure joy to drink. 

      		
 
			
 
No frills here, just pure, unadulterated Bowmore. This Islay whisky speaks of its location in a very pure and natural way. I find invigorating brine, seaweed, green olive, and fishnets, along with the classic Bowmore peat smoke. All these flavors are softened by gentle vanilla and honeyed malt, while background tropical fruit add complexity. 

      		
 
			
 
Bowmore lovers rarely get excited about the smokiness of their favorite single malt. Rather, they obsess about the tropical fruits that some old bottlings exhibit. Here is one such example. Initially the nose suggests verjus and linseed oil, but then peachiness rather than beachiness emerges. The smoke hits first on the tongue, backed up with mango and violet, then the tropical elements and the smoke play off each other up until a guava-laden finish. £120
      		
 
			
 
This gem is soft and seductive in personality. It is also very clean and still quite fresh for its age-obviously aged in an excellent cask. You'll find a bed of gentle sweetness, reminding me of coconut cream and vanilla mousse. A mélange of fruit (melon, black raspberries, strawberries) marries perfectly with the sweetness. Fresh brine notes and licorice root emerge on the palate and become more prominent towards the finish. This Legacy III is more polished and rounded, and not as tired or woody when compared to the recent 40 year old bottling. And the 40 year old, at $2,200 a pop, is also about five times more expensive.
      		
 
			
 
Deep gold color. Fresh, exciting, spicy aroma of brine, exotic pepper, seaweed, and raw fruit, with interwoven notes of delicate peat and caramel. Full-bodied and muscular. Flavors are incredibly vibrant and dynamic-almost challenging-and are similar to its aroma. Salty, peppery, intense finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Speyside single malt scotch Color: Shimmering gold Aroma: Very complex, with a potpourri of spicy, herbal notes. There’s a lot going on here. Nice depth too. Palate: Similar to its aroma, nicely balanced, and evolving. Lingering, spicy finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Bottled for Friends of the Classic Malts (which means most of you), this is Cragganmore in early autumnal guise. Dry leaves underfoot, ripe black fruits on the bushes, waxed jacket, chestnut, and a whiff of cedary smoke, opening into dried peach. The palate is thickly textured, with those fruits, dark chocolate, and pomegranate molasses. The immensely long finish gives you light pepper, smoke, and blackberry jam. Cragganmore at its very best, and at a great price. £80
      		
 
			
 
A thick, lush whisky. Notes of honey-drenched citrus, orange marmalade, chewy toffee and almonds, peppered with that classic coastal brine freshness and background spice I have come to love in Dalmore. Long, contemplative finish. This whisky packs plenty of freshness and liveliness for 30 years on oak and is a pure joy to drink. 

      		
 
			
 
By far the softest and gentlest of the range, and oh so drinkable. Hard to believe that this whisky is 40 years old, actually, as it shows no sign of excessive oak. Instead, there are soothing layers of caramel and toffee as the whisky’s foundation. Add orange marmalade and other juicy citrus fruits, cinnamon spice, graham cracker, and lightly toasted almond. A gentle, subtly sophisticated Dalmore, and an interesting comparison to the much different, more visceral 50 year old. If I were a rich man, I could drink this whisky every day -- it’s so easy-going.
      		
 
			
 
This 1978 vintage release from The Dalmore has been ‘finished’ for two years in Matusalem sherry casks from Gonzalez Byass, following 29 years in American white oak. Just 477 bottles are available. Freshly-ground coffee, marzipan, dark berries, and rich sherry on the smooth nose, with milk chocolate and Jaffa oranges. Smokier with water. Citrus fruits and more milk chocolate on the rich, full palate, plus roasted almonds. Long and juicy in the finish, with aniseed and fruit pastilles. 
-> On page 18 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Deeper, richer, more viscous, and more intriguing than the 12 year old (and not as sappy as the 18 year old). Complex and intriguing, with raisin, orange marmalade, grape skin, sugar plum, cinnamon bun, raspberry preserve, mixed nuts, and coal ash. Nice tannic grip on the finish. The best of the bunch, and very impressive!
      		
 
			
 
Dark amber in hue, this shows immediate mature elegance with great sweetness — think of spiced honey or mead. There are some light notes of pecan pie and all the while that thread of the sod. Glenfarclas can never fully escape its dark roots. There’s dried peach and fruit leather, toffee, and, with water, biscuits dunked in tea. The palate is autumnal and soft — fruit compote and peppermint. This is what you want from fully mature Glenfarclas at its peak. (A U.S. exclusive). 
      		
 
			
 
The hits just keep on coming for Glenfarclas. Here we see it not only with enormous age but in relaxed mode in terms of oak. You can tell it’s old: the leathery waxiness and exotic fruits of whisky rancio; you can tell it’s Glenfarclas because of the ever-present earthiness, but both are intensified into a new aromatic realm: gentlemen’s barbershop, rowan berry, and images of an old bonfire next to a gingerbread house. Mysterious, subtle, and highly complex. £5,995
      		
 
			
 
An impressive single cask bottling of Glenfiddich. It really shows the natural potential of this distillery. Nothing fancy here, just the pure elegance of Glenfiddich. Notes of shortbread, demerara sugar, and white chocolate, spiced with toasted nuts, cinnamon, ginger, and nutmeg. Very clean and polished. 

      		
 
			
 
The fifth in a series of Glenlivet Cellar Collection whiskies. This is a very complex whisky, with exotic notes of oak, sultana, vanilla cream, almonds, and evergreen. These notes are quite floral on the nose and well balanced, with no hint of excessive aging. The palate is polished, deep, and continuously evolving, with a long spicy finish. The oak notes reveal that this whisky has some years on it, but they in no way dominate or detract from the other flavors. An outstanding effort! This rivals the 1959 vintages as the best of the Cellar Collection releases. You’ll need deep pockets, though. 

      		
 
			
 
Amber chestnut color. Aromas of mature oak, leather, ripe fruit, and toffee, are very deep and well balanced. Its flavors are rich and enveloping, with notes of treacle, toffee, roasted nuts, and a long, spicy, woody finish that lingers. 

      		
 
			
 
Finished in first-fill sherry casks for two years. My feeling on any whisky finished in a different cask is this: it should give as much to the flavor profile as it takes away. In this instance, I feel it has, and more. It’s not as nimble as younger versions, but the sherry, along with the extra aging, contributes a silky texture and a richer, fuller dimension to the whisky. I can still detect some of the peach, vanilla, tropical fruit, and honeyed malt I enjoy in younger expressions, but its key flavor components are toffee, honey-dipped citrus, red licorice, chocolate-covered almonds, and fig, along with dried spice (cinnamon, nutmeg, mint tea) that emerges on the palate and peaks on the finish. The flavors are seamless and elegantly balanced.

      		
 
			
 
Fresh, vibrant, and beautifully complex. A clean, malty foundation accentuated by bright complex fruit, delicate spice, dried flowers, and gentle honeyed vanilla notes that linger on the palate. This is a wonderful whisky which is very versatile, but I can only imagine what it would taste like at 46% and unchill-filtered like the wood finish expressions.

      		
 
			
 
Astar’s flavor profile is similar to Glenmorangie 10 year old in many respects, showing a superb balance of sweetness, fruit, and spice. It’s not as subtle as the 10 year old expression, but it is creamier, richer, and fleshier, with loads of honeyed vanilla, coconut cream pie, toasted almond, vibrant spice (cinnamon, mint), and a basketful of citrus and summer fruits. The fact that it is bottled at 100 British Proof (57.1% abv) just accentuates every flavor and helps to make this whisky quite invigorating. Imagine Glenmorangie 10 year old with a shot of testosterone. I don’t rate very many ten year old (or younger ) whiskies over 90. This whisky has certainly earned it. 

      		
 
			
 
Glenmorangie Pride employs the use of Sauternes barriques to give a 10 year period of secondary maturation to a batch of spirit distilled in 1981. The result is a whisky with an intense, pungent, earthy nose; very complex, with polished old furniture notes, spices, oak tannins, and licorice. The palate is ‘full on’ for a Glenmorangie; waxy, with sherbet, honey, and baked apple, then orange marmalade, sultana, and a hint of smoke in the lengthy finish. Available July 1, 2011. Price is approximate.  
-> On page 19 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
A polished, very elegant expression with subtle complexity throughout. Notes of squeaky-clean fruit (tangerine, peach, nectarine, kiwi) in light syrup. Vibrant spice (cinnamon, white pepper, anise), creamy vanilla, and almond evolve on the palate, leading to a gentle finish. Surprisingly lively for a whisky more than 30 years old. When I think of great Glenrothes vintages, I go back to the 1972 vintage for comparison. Both are comparable in quality, with the 1972 vintage showing darker sugars, more weight, and more roasted nuts. 

      		
 
			
 
Made from whisky aged in second fill American oak sherry casks, distilled between 1973 to 1987. Richly malty, with honeyed citrus, juicy oak, chocolate fudge, and nougat. More subtle floral notes, licorice (red and black), ginger, and chamomile tea. Polished oak on the finish balances the sweetness. A great whisky to honor a great whisky maker! (Only 200 bottles for the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Very sophisticated and subtly complex. Perhaps the lightest-colored of the bunch. Fresh, appetizing brine and spice (cinnamon, vanilla, white pepper, and clove) on a bed of soft honey and creamy vanilla, with just a hint of fruit. The notes are bright, clean, and tight. Spicy, briny finish. A beautifully delicate Highland Park. (Bottled for Green’s) 

      		
 
			
 
The good news: This is one of the best Highland Park whiskies I have ever tasted. The bad news: it’s the new release for Travel Retail (formerly Duty Free). It’s lush, well-balanced, and very complex. Well-defined notes of toffee, candied fruit, and roasted nuts are accentuated by background honey, chocolate mousse, and smoke. Here’s the icing on the cake: it’s bottled at 47.5%, which really allows the flavors to shine. If you’re going overseas, consider tracking down a bottle. 

      		
 
			
 
Antique copper color, with some streaks of gold. A complex array of dried fruit on the nose, peppered with dried spice, orange marmalade, dark chocolate, and wood shavings. On the palate, the immediate impact is once again marmalade, followed briefly by bramble before drier notes of dark chocolate, wood shavings, anise, and subtle smoke emerge. Dry and spicy on the finish, but never austere. A delicious, contemplative 40 year old Highland Park that has aged gracefully.


This is a permanent addition to the range. Out of curiosity, I tasted it next to the other great Highland Parks (the 30 year old and several very good single cask bottlings over 30 years old). This whisky is in the same league as the others. Its only down side is that it’s a lot more expensive than the others.
      		
 
			
 
A marriage of eight casks (seven hogsheads, one sherry butt). A whisky in excellent shape for its age. Very clean and bright on the palate, with no excessive oak. Notes of lemon tart, clementine, plum, honeyed vanilla, and polished oak, peppered with clove, soft mint, marshmallow, and subtle toasted coconut. Clinging, mouth-coating finish.  


      		
 
			
 
An extremely limited edition issued at last year’s Islay Jazz Fest, this was chosen by warehouseman Iain McArthur as a prime example of a ‘bodega’ sherry butt (see page XX for more on the ‘bodega’ process). It is, simply, massive, with concentrated soy/balsamic notes combining with hot embers, burning rosemary, fig, coffee, and candied peels. The smokiness is unrestrained on the tongue; all soot, earth, and a rolling wave of deep, pimento-accented meatiness leading to a kippery finish. Magnificent.  (Available only at the distillery)£80    
      		
 
			
 
A sherry-cask Lagavulin, this immediately shows a rich, mellow power with a touch of potter’s wheel, but it needs water to bring out sandalwood, beach bonfire, kombu, Lapsang Souchong, and bog myrtle. The palate is where it shows itself fully; resinous and thick, unctuous even, with that scented pine/juniper tea note shifting into paprika-rubbed ham, membrillo, currants, blackberry. I’ve a feeling that this period will be seen as Lagavulin’s golden age. £99
      		
 
			
 
Gold color. Peaty, smoky, mature aromas, with notes of damp earth, pencil shavings, seaweed, brine, and vanilla. Oily, viscous body. Flavors are similar to its aroma, with a spicy, salty, black pepper, dryish finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Straw/honey color. Light to medium weight, with a slightly oily texture. Shy on the nose, but makes up for it on the finish. Fresh brine, toasted coconut, bright citrus fruit, and subtle mint on a bed of vanilla cream and honeyed malt. The peat smoke is restrained on the nose, but is more assertive on the palate, and it really kicks in on the finish, which is briny, smoky, appetizing, and long. The best Longrow since the 1974 vintage. If it would only just open up a little more on the nose it would challenge the best from ‘73 and ‘74. (Only 120 bottles for the U.S.)

-> On page 20 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Amber-chestnut color. Aromas are very mature and so thick, one almost needs a knife to cut it. Notes of dried fruit (orange, lemons, pineapple) and wood spices (especially clove), with more than a suggestion of peat smoke. Thick, enveloping texture-like a warm coat on a bitterly cold day. Very mature. One can easily deduce this is a very old whisky-the woodiness is evident on the palate. But it is not in excess. There’s plenty of dried fruit, enticing wood spices, and peat to keep the palate entertained, all the way through to its very long, dry finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Full-flavored, confident, and very dynamic. Bright fruit, teasing toffee, complex spices, cereal grain, and underlying light leather notes are all tightly integrated. Think an 11 year old whisky can’t be mature or complex? Think again! A Speyside powerhouse! (Available in the Chicago area.) 

      		
 
			
 
Deep amber in color with the green glints of first-fill sherry, this has bosky notes and meat—mutton and venison—plus graphite, bitter chocolate, and wet rock before layers of dried stone fruits and date. This is the most savory and Bovril-like of the new range. The palate is feral and earthy; think mushroom with game pie, and rowan berries. Deep, but with more dimensions than the previous 16 year old which, in comparison, seems like a blunt instrument. £180/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
Port Ellen whiskies are just going to keep getting rarer and more expensive. This old-fashioned whisky is beginning to show its age, but is still holding up nicely. It’s clean, with no excessive oak, and a soft, sweet maltiness for balance. Earthy and rooty at times, with tarry rope, beach pebbles, leafy smoke, bourbon barrel char, black licorice, lemon peel, and hints of shellfish and diesel fumes (like following a boat in the ocean). Long, smoky, lightly briny finish.
      		
 
			
 
Now the one that peat freaks wait patiently for every year, which makes it the bottling that produces the most debate. For me, this is up there with last year’s bottling, which itself ushered in a return to high standards after a slight dropping-off in expressiveness.
This is different, however. Yes, the color is as pale as ever — has anyone ever tasted an over-oaked Port Ellen? — and yes, the nose initially shows all of the distillery’s austere notes: think of a wet fish counter and the sensation of the sea rather than overt ‘fishiness,’ while there’s also a chilled cucumber note. The difference is the sweetness, which is more to the fore, and also, it would seem, a slight dropping-off in massive smokiness. Here the peat is integrated into the whole.
The palate has a numb spot right on the front, then wasabi-like heat coupled with olive oil. Soon the sea rolls in and it stands there like some creature from the Black Lagoon covered with balls of tar, draped in wet seaweed, encrusted with barnacles and clams — and clutching a kipper. But don’t forget the sweetness that spreads across the tongue and slowly drifts into fresh spice and antiseptic. Complex…and there’s a scant 3,000 bottled for the globe. [not available in the U.S.] £280
      		
 
			
 
Scarcity and the secondary market have driven prices up, so either buddy-up to a rich guy, or club together to try this. Greater levels of cask interaction have added an extra dimension to a whisky that is often skeletal. The smoke’s in the background, as salted cashew, peppermint, tansy, furniture polish, and smoked meats take center stage. The palate is slowly expanding and smoked, with some chocolate and wax. Finally, a Port Ellen that is truly, classically mature. A killer. (2,964 bottles)
      		
 
			
 
Antique amber color. Mature complex aromas-especially in wood spice notes. In addition to wood spices, I also found notes of roasted nuts, coconuts, orange marmalade, anise, and subtle brine. Thick and syrupy in texture, with complex flavors that echo its aroma. The depth on the palate is incredible! Long lingering finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Antique amber color. Ripe, fallen fruit aromas laced with coconut, marshmallow, and almonds. The sherry cask influence is very prominent on the nose, but the Springbank "brine" character still manages to fight through. Full bodied, with a soothing texture. Huge flavors with great balance and depth, consisting of exotic fruits, complex wood spices, brine, and coconut. Long, lingering satisfying finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Aromatically fruity and quite full, with wonderful depth on the nose and palate. The fruit (golden raisins, apricot, red licorice, papaya) is balanced by restrained honey, vanilla, and fennel. The whisky is always dry but never excessively so. A delicious, ultra-mature whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Surprisingly clean and youthful for a 30 year old, both on the nose and palate. Complex, too, with a sea breeze freshness, vanilla malt, polished oak spice, smoked seaweed, lightly tarred boat docks, toasted nuts, and lingering telicherry pepper. Mature, yet still quite powerful. Rivals the original Talisker 25 year old and the Talisker 18 year old as one of the finest Talisker whiskies ever released. 

-> On page 21 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
A sophisticated and refined Talisker, if that’s not an oxymoron. But this is certainly true when compared to the 10 year old. This 18 year old is deeper too, with less of the fishnets, more of oak boat docks. Less lemongrass, more fruit gum drops. There’s still that knock-out punch on the finish. There’s a fine line between polishing the rough edges of a beautifully powerful whisky and ripping its heart and soul out with a knife by dumbing it down. This whisky has not crossed that line. A fabulous whisky! 

      		
 
			
 
A bottling from only five barrels of 95% rye whiskey produced at the former Seagram’s distillery in Indiana. It’s the American whiskey equivalent of drinking Ardbeg Supernova. Powerful and invigorating are words that come to mind. Crisp mint, warming cinnamon, dried citrus, cocoa, roasted nuts, and subtle botanicals are soothed by caramel, molasses, and honeyed orchard fruit. Brisk, bracing, spicy finish. The notes are clean, and the whiskey’s not just a one-trick “rye” pony. The sweetness balances the rye spice quite nicely. If you just can’t get enough rye in your whiskey, then this one’s for you. (Available only at the High West Distillery in Park City, Utah.) Price is per 375ml
      		
 
			
 
One of the best Handy offerings yet. Very vibrant with dynamic spice (firm mint, warming cinnamon, allspice, hint of clove) and lush fruit (citrus, orchard fruit, golden raisin, brandy, and teasing coconut), all tamed by a bed of soothing caramel and honey. It’s not easy for a whiskey to come across as excitingly youthful, yet nicely matured. It’s a difficult balance to achieve, but this whiskey pulls it off. (Editor's Choice)
      		
 
			
 
The youngster in the 2011 Antique Collection. One taste and its relative youth is confirmed. (But no worries; it’s mature enough to enjoy neat or with some water (and would be a killer in cocktails). This is rye whiskey in its most vibrant, masculine, and purest form. Bold spice (fresh evergreen, warming cinnamon), honey-coated orchard fruit, golden raisin, caramel, and brandy with a crisp, clean finish. The American equivalent to a young, cask-strength, smoky Islay whisky. 
      		
 
			
 
The youthful, testosterone-laden member of the Antique Collection family. Bold and spicy with cinnamon and clove, but softened and balanced by thick toffee, vanilla, and honeyed orchard fruit. Lush and mouth-coating. An exercise in extremes: bold, muscular spice, along with soothing sweeter notes. While its older sibling, Sazerac 18 year old, expresses a classic “older rye” low-risk profile, Handy pushes the envelope in many directions. Buffalo Trace Antique Collection 2013 Release.
      		
 
			
 
Complex on the nose, and the flavors just dance on the palate. This whiskey is bright, cleanly malty, and quite fruity with a tropical accent -- peach, mango, cantaloupe, sultana, and caramelized pineapple. Balanced by notes of honey, vanilla cream, and soft coconut. The best Cooley whiskey I have ever tasted!
      		
 
			
 
Well-structured and masculine with its rich malty backbone and mouth-coating fruit. Yet, there’s a silky, seductive underbelly that’s very compelling. Notes of sultana, honey-drenched mandarin, ripe peach, thick toffee, and anise, with a peppering of spice throughout, especially toward the finish, where a hint of smoke emerges. The grain whisky enhances the blend’s allure by cutting through the whisky’s viscosity, making it very more-ish. I love the combination of drinkability, flavor, complexity, and balance in this blend. Very versatile. Single malt drinkers will thoroughly enjoy this experience. (Note: at this time, this whisky is not sold in the U.S.)

      		
 
			
 
Bottled to commemorate the 150
 Anniversary of Canadian Club whisky. An amazingly fresh and vibrant whisky given its age and delicateness. I feared that, given how light in body traditional Canadian whiskies are, this whisky would be old, tired, and show too much oak (which was true for Crown Royal’s ultra-premium offering, XR). But this isn’t the case. There’s an excellent balance of silky caramel, vanilla icing, dried spice (cinnamon, spearmint), and berried fruit, along with more subtle notes of toffee apple, corn oil, and soft dried oak on the finish. Not as luxurious as Crown Royal’s Cask No. 16, but it shines with its polish and purity. 

      		
 
			
 
The final deal of Ichiro Akuto’s Card Series, a vatting of Hanyu from 1985 to 2000. Highly complex, rich, and distinctly resinous. Typical Hanyu boldness, but with balance struck between weightiness, finesse, and intensity. There’s old cobbler’s shop, tack room, light smoke, incense, ink, autumn leaves, and sumac. The palate is sweet to start, then builds in power. Leathery, then praline, damson jam, and fine tannins. Water loosens the tension, allowing yuzu to show. What a way to go out. £220
      		
 
			
 
This is what I wish the standard Maker’s Mark would be: more mature, spicier, more complex, and with a richer finish. Caramel kissed with honey provides a base for marzipan, cotton candy, cinnamon, clove, and a balancing leather dryness on the finish. Price is per 375 ml.
-> On page 22 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Redemption repeats their barrel-proof MGP-sourced 95% rye, now at 7 years old. Has a year significantly changed last year's 90-point outing? Oak is more subdued and the pepper floats on sweet, light caramel. It is still quite nice at full-bore, no water needed. Sweet vanilla and bitter rye oil blend surprisingly well; this is hitting the bells, and it's better integrated. Big, swaggering, and sporting big-barrel maturity. Can go toe-to-toe with almost any rye out there.
      		
 
			
 
Redemption delivers a 10 year old, barrel proof rye (sourced from MGP); the bottled whiskey is mingled from only six barrels. Nose of hot, bitter rye spice and caramel with oak. Great wham
 feel of sweet whiskey followed immediately by oily, spicy rye, which then controls the flavor and finish without dominating. Not over-oaked, and these older MGP barrels are finally showing what 95% rye can do. At 6 years, it could be a high-rye bourbon; this simply shouts rye. Fascination.
      		
 
			
 
Those of you who think Canadian whiskies are thin and bland should give this one a try. No, it’s not a new concept, like Forty Creek. It’s still very much a “traditional” Canadian. But when compared to most Canadian whiskies, it’s richer, creamier, and velvety smooth. The flavors are straightforward — primarily vanilla, with some crème brûlée, toasted marshmallow, tangerine, peaches and cream, and gentle rye spice — but they are clean and well-balanced. A delicious, lighter-style whisky. 
      		
 
			
 
Millstone is made by Zuidam, a Dutch spirits and liquor company that prides itself on never cutting corners and in using the very finest ingredients. There are hundreds of European distilleries making spirit, but few this good. Its malt and rye whiskies have always been special, but this is Premier League, a world class sherried 12 year old that matches many sherried Scotch whiskies flavor to flavor. That's a first for Europe. €60
      		
 
			
 
From the distillery that received last year’s World Whisky award comes another contender for the title in 2013. This is called 100 because it’s 100 percent rye distilled in pot stills, 100 proof, and 100 months old (a bit over eight years). It’s big, and perfectly balanced between honey and fruit, sparkling distinctive raunchy spice, and a dash of ginger biscuits. This is rye to die for. Superb. €53
      		
 
			
 
The Kavalan flag is unfurling fast. The whiskies are making it Stateside, and they're improving from a very high base. A couple of degrees stronger than previously, this is far richer than any wine cask-matured whisky has a right to be. This is huge, with a tropical nose of mango, melon, and papaya, and a hint of dustiness. The palate is astounding. Rich, sweet, and rounded, it coats the mouth with an intense mixture tempered by burnt toffee and cocoa. Stunning.
      		
 
			
 
Surprise, surprise. This is like the school's best pitcher, who then steps onto the football team and throws for a game-winning touchdown. This is a whole new side to Kavalan. Remember Faith No More doing “Easy”? Having out-sherried and out-bourboned us with kickass rock-n-roll whisky, Kavalan goes for gentle and croony, with vanilla and honey. The coup de grace? Apple pie and cream morph into licorice and menthol. Exquisite. 
      		
 
			
 
Kentucky straight bourbon whiskey finished in a port pipe. This is veteran master distiller Lincoln Henderson’s newest creation, and it’s a beauty. Richly textured, silky, and well-rounded, with ripe berried fruits, candied tangerine, light toffee, maple syrup, and creamy vanilla, sprinkled with spice (cinnamon, hint of mint). Smooth, silky finish, and dangerously drinkable! The port pipe notes dovetail perfectly. Lovely just the way it is, but it’s begging for a cigar. My only gripe: why not 45 or 50% ABV? But I’m splitting hairs. I really enjoy this stuff!
      		
 
			
 
OK, confession time. This remains one of my favorite whiskies ever, a classic example of what long, slow aging in a refill cask can do for a whisky — increase its unctuous nature, bring out butterscotch, ginseng, honey, deepen the orchard fruits, and release a dazzling spiciness on the tongue. It has balance, it has finesse, and there’s not much left. £155(Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
All the current Elijah Craig 20 year old releases in distribution are single barrel offerings. I’ve tasted a few, and they vary to a degree. This is my favorite so far. Yes, there’s a lot of oak here (resinous, spicy, leathery, tobacco-tinged), but it’s on a bed of layered sweetness (nutty toffee, caramel fudge, maple syrup) that supports and marries with the oak. An ideal postprandial bourbon.
-> On page 23 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Cinnamon, cloves, ginger, candy sweetness, and strong bitter grapefruit pith overtake an initial dry dusty rye. After years in an assortment of bourbon barrels, new wood is used to tame the rugged rye notes while adding complexity and breadth. The oak has left obvious traces behind, with barrel notes and hints of fresh-cut firewood. Candied, in the vein of Wiser’s Legacy, but sharper, harder, and much crisper. Canada’s non-chill filtered reward for being Wiser’s biggest fan. (
C$99
      		
 
			
 
Pencil shavings, then vanilla, caramel, barley sugar, and bitter candied orange peel. Mild white pepper persists in a spicy fusion, from which a subtle but energizing pithiness teases out delicate smatterings of cloves, ginger, and allspice. The fruitiness of canned peaches, apricots, and sour green apples adds dimension and balance. Complex and so tightly integrated that rich as it is, individual flavors are little more than nuances. Finish is long and gingery with refreshing citrus pith. 
 C$100
      		
 
			
 
Deep, mature in nature, and very complex. Notes of polished leather, maple syrup, and dark pit fruit, with suggestions of tobacco smoke, wood shavings, and unsweetened chocolate. References to fine old bourbon and ultra-matured pot-still rum provide intrigue. Proof that Japan produces some outstanding, distinctive whiskies. Nicely done! 

      		
 
			
 
Launched a few years ago with a Dr. Haddock-like cartoon figure on the label, Big Peat does just what it suggests it does…and then some. It's a mix of Islay peated malts and includes some Port Ellen, but don't get distracted by that. Instead, indulge yourself in the biggest, peatiest, oiliest, earthiest, grungiest, gunkiest slab of industrial malt this side of a leaky steam engine. This whisky just gets better and better.
      		
 
			
 
A quintessential Canadian whisky that holds fresh-cut lumber, hot white pepper, and creamy oak caramels in delicate balance. Long years in oak have delivered a range of complex flavors that evolve slowly in the glass and on the tongue. Sweet vanilla contrasts with dusty rye, while a drop of pickle juice slowly matures into poached pears with cloves. Dry grain ripens into fresh-baked biscuits before it all fades away in clean oak and citrus pith. C$75
      		
 
			
 
Exclusive Malts doesn't disclose the source distillery, which doesn't matter when you’ve got a whisky that’s a gem. Apple cider defines the nose and is complemented by ginger and iris. On the palate this whisky is lush but well balanced, with honeyed apple cider, gingerbread cookie, and baked apple. In the center of all this is 
. Ginger spice and baked apple define the finish, which is long and flavorful. Great balance, integration, and flavor. What more can you ask for? 
      		
 
			
 
A rich luxurious whisky finished in cognac casks, as was the crisper, brighter Cask No. 16 that it replaces. This is the cedary, leathery, tobacco-ish sipping whisky of the private club. Simple toffee and the cherry essence of 
 evolve into ripe red apples and heavy, dusky, dark fruit with candied citrus peel, bitter almond skins, and hints of oak. Sizzling gingery spice and white pepper linger over textured sandalwood. Defined by its heavy, creamy body.
      		
 
			
 
Enjoyable, dark sweet notes: molasses, maple syrup, fig, grilled corn. The spices are there, too (cool mint, cocoa powder, warming cinnamon, nutmeg). They’re well-rounded and show up more toward the finish (along with some tobacco and polished leather). Soft, reserved, and slightly past its prime, but it still maintains its dignity.
      		
 
			
 
Like the man himself, this is altogether more considered and elegant, mixing whiskeys up to 25 years old for a complex and less bruising experience than the Powers. Instead, lemon and lime zest, kumquat, and blood orange entwine themselves around vanilla, nutmeg, and soft, drying tannins. No big knockout punches, but it goes the distance and wins unanimously and easily on points. €160 (Currently not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Balanced Islay whiskies combine peat smoke characteristics with a sweet foundation. They’re not one-dimensionally smoky. This whisky is an excellent example. This is a peat-laden whisky with refinement and grace. Creamy vanilla, caramel, and honey harmoniously marry with persistent -- yet controlled -- peat smoke. Crisp spice notes and dancing fruit throughout adds complexity. Well done.
-> On page 24 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
(Exclusive to Park Ave. Liquors, New York, NY) This is a vatting of two single malts: the malty and sometimes smoky Ardmore and the always smoky and spicy Caol Ila. The whisky expresses smartly complex aromas of smoky bonfire smothered with peat, with notes of tar, olives, freshly ground pepper, and seaweed. A sweet maltiness (from the Ardmore?) binds the flavors together. On the palate, the whisky begins sweet, then the powerful peat smoke emerges, yielding to olives, peppery spices, and seaweed. The finish is long and powerful with the peat smoke again emerging and lingering on seemingly forever. A monster indeed. This whisky’s complexity demonstrates the virtues of vatting. Many smoky whiskies have nothing else going on behind the cloak of smoke. This one does. 

      		
 
			
 
Compass Box Whiskies celebrates the fifth anniversary of The Peat Monster by thinking big: bigger intensity, put into a bigger bottle. This bold whisky is packed with Islay and coastal character, showing tarry rope, brine, and a hint of seaweed, along with teasing smoked olive, anise, and mustard seed. There is some civility to the whisky: sweeter notes of vanilla wafer, baked apple, ripe peach, and cream attempt to soften the blow. Smoke and tar on the finish. Nicely done. (Price is per 1.75L.) 

      		
 
			
 
Peat Monster is a staple Compass Box blended malt whisky, but this raises the bar significantly. The nose is “as you were”: peat reek, seaside, very Islay. But on the palate John Glaser's added some peaty Highland whisky—probably a signature Clynelish—to add a hint of licorice, a softer, fruitier smoke base, and through some virgin French oak, a delightful spiciness. Compass Box is in a purple patch. Again.
      		
 
			
 
The original Great King Street blend was all sweet lemon and spice. This is something else again. This is a gutsy, urban wise guy of a whisky, rich in peat, with distinctive malty flavors—all in all, closer to a malt than a blend. That's because of the high malt content, and only the rounded edges and soft finish are gilded by grain. Some fruit and spice emerge through the peat, but the smoke's what you remember—a master class in blending.
      		
 
			
 
In my book, the bar can't be set much higher than it is for Flaming Heart and this latest version doesn't disappoint, though it does head off into a scuzzier, grittier, and more peaty direction than the 10th anniversary bottling, and has lost some of the black currant fruitiness in the process. No matter: this smolders with peaty and fishy intensity, works its way round to tinned strawberries, damson, and berry fruits, and emerges sooty and smoky. A BIG whisky. 
      		
 
			
 
Compass Box takes a fresh approach to flavored whisky by infusing Navalino oranges and spices into a blend of Highland single malt and single grain whisky. Bright and slightly bitter orange peel combines with vanilla, honey, and malt. The grain whisky gives nice support and structure along with black pepper, cinnamon, and clove spice. Great balance between the whisky and flavoring in a flavored whisky that is much more dry than sweet. Finally, a flavored whisky to get really excited about.
      		
 
			
 
Johnnie Walker Blue, meet Dewar’s Signature. Signature is Dewar’s introduction into the ultra-premium blended scotch category. Like Johnnie Walker Blue, Signature bears no age statement, but I’m told that a 27 year old Aberfeldy is the heart of the blend. The first release consists only of 1,000 individually numbered bottles, and they’re only available in New York City. I’m always a little skeptical of very expensive blends that come in fancy packages. There are some very good, reasonably priced blends in the 10-20 year old range, and the expensive ones are often only marginally better, if that. But I like this whisky a whole lot better than the standard Dewar’s White Label, and it is also superior to Dewar’s 12 year old-a whisky which I find to be quite enjoyable. While maintaining the Dewar’s profile-nicely balanced-this whisky offers greater depth, maturity, and complexity without being too woody-a creamy, malty foundation makes sure of that. The whisky expresses a rich, honeyed maltiness which combines nicely with notes of golden raisins, vanilla, caramel, and crème brûlée, with just a hint of spicy oak notes for complexity. Signature is a different style when compared to Johnnie Walker Blue-it’s more elegant and bashful-but, like Blue, I put Signature on my short list of the finest blends on the market. 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Kentucky straight bourbon whiskey Color: Deep amber Aroma: Deep, very mature, dry and spicy (especially spearmint), with underlying notes of ripe fruit, polished oak, and leather. The aroma is so thick, you almost need a knife to cut through it. Palate: Rich, thick, and chewy in texture-sweeter up front, then drying out towards its finish. Rather bold in flavors that are identical to its aroma, but never overpowering. Soothing, satisfying finish that seems to linger on forever. 

      		
 
			
 
Notes of "rummy" molasses, Sugar Daddies, red currant, citrus peel, sandalwood, polished leather, and vanilla cream. Subtle, teasing black licorice and brittle mint emerge from time to time. Well-balanced, with all the flavors sharing the limelight. A beautiful example of mature bourbon. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in Zinfandel barrels for eight years after spending six years in new charred oak. Intriguing spice (mint, cocoa, cinnamon), along with molasses, roasted nuts, and delicately textured fruit (blackberry, boysenberry). Nice interplay between the fruit, sweet notes, and dried spice which emerges on the second half of the palate. 

-> On page 25 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Elegant, subtly complex, and perilously drinkable. Honey tones dovetail nicely with gentle oak spice and bright fruit. My favorite of the bunch. Very lovely! Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Richer and fuller when compared to the Standard Stave Drying Time variant in this Experimental Collection. Sweeter too, with creamy layers of vanilla and caramel. The extended drying time influence tames the dried spice and oak resin and is proof that extended stave aging really benefits older bourbons that might otherwise be dominated by oak. Sadly, with whiskey in such demand, I doubt many bourbon producers will take the time to age the staves longer. Price per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Buffalo Trace distilled a wheated bourbon and aged barrels from the same distillation date on three different floors (1, 5 and 9) for 12 ½ years to see what the differences would be. This is similar to an experiment they conducted last year using a rye mashbill bourbon. As you will see, the higher the floor, the more intense the flavors, and the greater the wood influence.

Darker, more intense and mysterious in personality when compared to its two siblings. Notes of barrel char, roasted nuts, polished oak, and tobacco, peppered with dried spice. Fortunately, sweet notes of toffee, maple syrup, and caramel stand up to the dry notes and provide balance. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
This year’s 1995 Vintage is another delicious treat. It is one of the most richly textured bottlings of the past ten vintages and its flavors meld seamlessly, combining layers of creamy sweetness (chewy toffee, butterscotch, and a touch of corn), spice (mint, vanilla, cinnamon), polished oak, vibrant fruit, and a dusting of cocoa and nutmeg. 

      		
 
			
 
Amber color. This particular bottling (and remember that single barrel bottlings vary slightly from one to another) expresses a potpourri of spices, accentuated with honey tones, toffee, oaky vanilla, and a hint of fruit. The flavors are perfectly balanced. 

      		
 
			
 
A single barrel offering to celebrate Distillery Manager Jim Rudtledge’s 40 years in the industry. Dry, botanical, and teasingly complex, with bright fruit, crisp spice, and complex oak. Its dryness is prevalent throughout-the maturity is evident-but never excessively so, and there’s always a soft interplay of honey and vanilla. A very elegant whiskey. 

      		
 
			
 
A fuller-bodied, sweeter encounter than Barrel #55-6F reviewed below. More rounded and even-keeled throughout, too! Chewy toffee, rummy molasses, and nougat, with underlying notes of dark, berried fruit, accentuating spice, and supple leather. The heavyweight of the group. 

      		
 
			
 
Thirteen years old, but it shows its age nicely. It’s peppered with complex dried spice notes (mint, cinnamon, ginger, vanilla),
yet it also has interwoven sweet notes (maple syrup, caramel, honey) to keep the whiskey from being too dry. Hints of dark chocolate and berried fruit add complexity. Dry, spicy, tobacco, and leather-tinged finish. Great complexity!
      		
 
			
 
These Stagg releases are becoming legendary. This one, while not the best of the bottlings, maintains the Stagg reputation. When compared with the earlier release in 2005, this Stagg expresses a shade less oak. It’s also more subtle and creamier on the palate. It’s clean, superbly balanced, and very drinkable-even at higher strengths. Light toffee, maple syrup, and caramel corn provide a bed of sweetness. Layered on top are notes of candied fruit, crisp mint, vanilla, and polished oak. Soft finish. Just don’t add too much water to it because the flavors seem to lose their cohesiveness at lower strengths. Drink this whiskey at a strength higher than you normally would to fully appreciate it. 

      		
 
			
 
The newest member of the portfolio and worth every penny. It’s the distillery’s "super-premium" offering, produced in small batches and (for now anyway) small quantities. It is my favorite of the three Dickels from a pure taste perspective, with a lushness, roundness, sophistication and grace not often seen in a bourbon or Tennessee whiskey. All of the flavors of the other two Dickels are in here, and they’re in perfect balance and very tight. (Note: my review was from the first bottling, which was a rectangular-shaped bottle with white lettering. There has since been a second bottling, which I have not yet tasted.) 

-> On page 26 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The star of the portfolio. A true sipping whisky with elegance and grace. Perhaps the best Tennessee whisky on the market. Honey-soaked corn bread, rhum agricole, ripe nectarine, and glazed citrus. Hint of mint, green tea, and cinnamon. Very polished.   
      		
 
			
 
Amber mahogany. Rich, mature aromas of vanilla, cinnamon, leather, teaberry, coconut, and dark fruit-very complex indeed. Big, coating, soothing texture. Flavors are very mature, rounded and nicely balanced, with notes of molasses, dried fruit, cinnamon, and teaberry. It finishes long, with a very soothing demeanor. 

      		
 
			
 
From a single barrel, but the barrel number is (unfortunately) not specified. It’s nicely matured, deftly balanced, and complex, with a wide range of fruit, layered sweetness, and a cabinet full of spice, especially mint. Easy to drink—I’m enjoying it immensely without adding any water—and deceptively beautiful; there are no fancy bells or whistles here. Great bourbon, honoring a great master distiller.
      		
 
			
 
Beautifully balanced, like Kentucky Vintage, but more complex and with greater depth. It’s also not as boldly dry as Pure Kentucky XO. Rather, it is softer and more seductive. This is splendid bourbon! It would be a shame to adulterate this bourbon in any way-don’t even think of mixing it. Find yourself a quiet moment, pour yourself a measure, and savor. 

      		
 
			
 
This whisky packs a lot of clean, complex, and well-balanced flavors. It features a creamy, layered, malty-sweet foundation (vanilla, caramel, toffee) chock full of bright fruit (golden raisin, honeyed orchard fruit, currant), rounded out by firm, dried spice (cinnamon, nutmeg, mint) that dances on the palate. Long, warming, spicy finish. Nicely done!
      		
 
			
 
From a sherry cask. Bright and lively. Quite fruity, with notes of golden raisin, pineapple, nectarine, and tangerine. The fruit is balanced by honeyed malt and light caramel. A dusting of vanilla, cinnamon, and hint of cocoa, with black licorice on the finish. Lush and mouth-coating. The best of the Aberfeldy whiskies I’ve tasted to date. 
      		
 
			
 
Some of the best intensely smoky, peaty Islay whiskies are balanced with a foundation of malty sweetness. This whisky is an excellent example. A sinewy malt with the classic bold notes of kiln smoke, peat, tarry rope, and coal ash. Sweeter notes of honeyed malt, ripe vanilla, chocolate fudge, and toasted marshmallow temper and sooth the palate, along with background berry confit. The smoke lingers long on the palate. Ardbeg devotees will not be disappointed. 

      		
 
			
 
Similar to the standard Ardbeg 10 year old, except that a portion of the whisky was aged in heavily charred barrels (referred to as an “alligator” char). An aggressive whisky — even for Ardbeg — with a leathery texture throughout. Dynamic too, with coal tar, soot, bourbon barrel char, espresso, cocoa, licorice root, smoked fish, and a hint of ginger. There’s a nice creamy vanilla underbelly to balance the aggressiveness and (at least partially) muzzle the Alligator. 
      		
 
			
 
This isn’t quite a distillery-only bottling so much as a bottle only available at the distillery — which isn’t exactly the same thing. Bottled more than 10 years ago to mark the distillery’s centenary, incredibly a small amount is still available, and it is well worth pursuing.
Until relatively recently Ardmore was an industry secret, cherished by those in the know. But the peaty and feisty no-age-statement Ardmore Traditional has introduced the malt to a new generation of drinkers, and last year’s sweet and fruity 25 year old suggested that the distillery has a potentially diverse range of future treasures to be excited about. This bottling is light, soft, sweet, and juicy. Orange flavors and peat team up to steer a middle way for what is a delicious and highly more-ish malt. Its only flaw is in the finish, which dies away too quickly for this palate. Perhaps a slightly higher strength would have improved it. No matter, it’s like the fade out of the guitar solo at the end of your favorite track; it’s a bit frustrating because you want it to go on and on, but it doesn’t stop you going back and listening to it all again.

      		
 
			
 
A vatting of selected casks located at Balvenie’s No. 24 warehouse in Dufftown, this is made up of seven ex-bourbon casks and three butts whose ages range from 1967 to 1989, all of which are then ‘married’ in a large vat (aka a ‘tun’). There’s classic Balvenie honey, along with macadamia, pistachio, and caramelized fruits. As it opens, it shifts into a high-class gentleman’s cologne: musk and sandalwood with some mulberry to add depth. Elegant and magnificent.  £165
-> On page 27 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This is the heavily peated expression of BenRiach. (BenRiach does not differentiate their peated expressions with a different name, as Springbank does with Longrow, or Tobermory with Ledaig.) It’s also finished with the dark, lush “PX” sherry. Both influences are very evident, with the deep, heavy, earthy, smoky notes complemented by dark, fleshy, dried fruit. I think the two different influences marry very nicely here and I really enjoy drinking it. (Bottling at cask strength is a bonus!)
      		
 
			
 
Mahogany color. Medium to full in body, and rich. Aroma and flavors are very reminiscent of the "Black Bowmore" releases: burnt fruit, roasted nuts, fruit cake, polished leather, wood resin, and just a teasing of smoke. There is a harmonious balance between the dry oak spices and the sweet, fruity oloroso sherry notes. Soothing finish.

   Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: Approx. $1,500. Only 300 bottles, available this fall at specialty retailers nationwide. 

   This whisky was distilled around the same time-and is very similar in flavor profile-as the legendary "Black Bowmore" whiskies released several years ago. Comparing this release with the Black Bowmore is only natural. Having tried this whisky next to the previous Black Bowmores, I can happily say that this whisky is as good as they are (although a lot more expensive). While the original Black Bowmore whiskies are a little bigger and fuller in body (especially towards the finish), this new 1964 Vintage is a tad softer, sweeter, more rounded, and more seductive. This is a very contemplative whisky-the more attention you devote to it, the more pleasure it gives you.
      		
 
			
 
This is a five year old expression of the more highly peated Bruichladdich whisky being referred to as Port Charlotte (named after the now-silent distillery down the road from Bruichladdich). More highly peated indeed. If you like your smoky Islay whiskies young and masculine, this one is for you. It’s like sticking your head in a peat-fired kiln. But there’s more to this whisky than massive smoke. There are underlying notes of kippers, soot, and tar. With further investigation, there are spice notes of black pepper and black licorice stick. What really makes this whisky multi-dimensional and balanced is its sweet underbelly of thick toffee, jammy fruit, and almond butter. Youthful, but not immature. 

      		
 
			
 
Creamier than the 12-bigger too, with broader shoulders and greater depth. Fairly sweet up front, with vanilla-laced malt, chewy toffee, and ripe fruit. Almond fudge and a hint of espresso add intrigue, while dry wood spice on the finish underpins the whisky's characteristic sweetness. Contemplative and complex.
      		
 
			
 
A seductive Dalmore. Very fruity too, with Seville orange, peaches in syrup, clementine, pineapple, and bramble. Sugared almond, powdered vanilla, ginger, and lush sherry on the finish add depth and dimension. Consistent on the nose and palate, and with great balance. I’m glad they stopped the amoroso finishing when they did. I feel that any more sherry influence here would have been counterproductive. Very lovely!
      		
 
			
 
Back due to popular demand in the U.S., this new incarnation of the Cigar Malt sees the percentage of ex-oloroso ‘Matusalem’ sherry wood ramped up from 60 to 70 percent. Pass the Partagas! Spicy Christmas cake with rich sherry notes on the nose. Fragrant, with figs, cinnamon, ripe oranges, and glacé cherries. Robust sweet toffee and mango flavors, with oloroso sherry, vanilla, and lively spices. Medium to long in the finish, with ginger, treacle, and licorice. 
      		
 
			
 
One of the first wood finishing efforts under Edradour’s new management. Very creamy in texture, with notes of sticky toffee, vanilla fudge, fruit cake, raisin, and burnt almonds. All this sits on a bed of dry, minty, resinous oak. The flavors dovetail nicely, with a soothing, satisfying finish. The port wood finishing adds complexity without dominating. 

      		
 
			
 
I am amazed by how many old, sherried Glen Grant whiskies have been released to the market in the past ten years. (Did the distillery owners at the time also own sherry 
, or what?) Anyway, some of these have been dark, decadent, and delicious, and I’ll put this whisky in that category. Chestnut colored, with lush fruit, treacle, dark chocolate, leather, tobacco, roasted walnuts, and cherry cough syrup. A complex, well-structured whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Rich gold. Superb mature nose with subtle whisky rancio, mixing fragrant mango with a little mint, rosewater, and waxiness; there’s even some custard and a whiff of woodsmoke before sandalwood brings back the exotic edge. The palate is delicate with an amazingly fresh acidity that becomes herbal (basil and tarragon). It’s late summer, when there’s a sense of the year turning, and you allow fond memories to gently wash over you. £7,800
      		
 
			
 
Quite earthy, with orris root, burlap, and dunnage warehouse notes.  Distinctly meaty—Bovril (beef stock)—then cedary. This untamed edge—think Mortlach or Benrinnes—dominates the palate, but the cask (a refill butt) isn’t overstating its presence. There’s espresso on the finish. Here’s Glenfarclas taking a ramble on the wild side. If your preference is for more robust styles, then look no further. £345
-> On page 28 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
We’re drinking liquid history here. Antique gold color. Aromas of dried citrus, lemongrass, and ginger with background honeyed vanilla, dried herb, bouquet of roses, and a wisp of smoke. Very long and evolving on the palate, going from sweet to dry: vanilla custard, crème brulee, white chocolate, candied citrus, juicy oak, polished leather, dried tobacco, and then resinous oak, with teasing dry roasted nuts and hint of peat bog throughout. Long dry, resinous finish. Remarkably well-maintained for its age. I can tell that it’s an old whisky, but it shows good complexity. It’s not tired and excessively oaked. 

When compared to the 30 year old and 40 year old expressions, it’s actually more vibrant and youthful than the 40 sample I have. Yet it doesn’t have the deft balance and roundness which I consider a hallmark of the 30. Bottom line here: Anyone who can afford this whisky and actually drinks it will not be disappointed. It’s really nice. But for us regular folk, try to pick up a 30 year old Glenfiddich if you can find one and you won’t go wrong with the whisky -- or the price (relatively speaking, that is).
      		
 
			
 
A classic mature ‘Fiddich nose, that mix of chocolate, sweet fruits, and funkiness. Dried apples, a little currant, but also a pure thread of sweetness. In time, a little fresh mushroom. Complex. Soft on the tongue, so you need to concentrate on what’s happening. Later becomes minty, with supple tannins and a little artichoke on the finish. Water needs to be handled carefully to bring out green herbal notes. I’d probably keep water on the side. Excellent. 
£250
      		
 
			
 
A first-fill sherry cask bottling (one cask, exclusive to North America). Some of the old Glenglassaugh whiskies can be very delicious, and this is one of them. It's very clean, lush, and fruity (bramble, citrus, golden raisin), with a kiss of honey, toffee, and soft spice. Elegantly sherried; it’s never cloying. A very nice whisky from a quality cask that tastes more like 21 or 25 years old than 37. (I mean this in a good way.) 
      		
 
			
 
Glengoyne 35 year old has been aged in sherry casks and just 500 decanters have been released. The nose offers sweet sherry, maraschino cherries, honey, sponge cake, marzipan, and soft fudge, turning to caramel in time, with a whiff of worn leather. Slick in the mouth, with spicy dried fruit, and more marzipan and cherries. Long in the finish with plain chocolate cherry liqueur; still spicy. Finally a buttery, bourbon-like note. No negative cask connotations in this well-balanced after-dinner dram.
      		
 
			
 
Whiskies distilled at Glenlivet might be easy to find throughout the world, but this is a good thing. Take this one from Duncan Taylor—it’s delicious! It’s elegantly complex, with a tropical accent (coconut, pineapple), strawberries with whipped cream, and caramel-dipped apple. The sweetness is never heavy or cloying, and it’s balanced by lovely dried spice throughout (vanilla, ginger, soft mint, nutmeg), and especially towards the finish. Nicely done! 
      		
 
			
 
A special bottling to celebrate a major distillery expansion in 2010. So nice to see this whisky bottled at cask strength and not chill-filtered. Silky smooth, velvety texture. Creamy sweet foundation of vanilla fudge and caramel-coated almond. Plenty of fruit, too (golden raisin, honeyed peach, ripe nectarine, hint of banana bread). Richly textured, good weight (but not cloying), and the flavors combine seamlessly. A celebratory whisky indeed.
      		
 
			
 
A quintet of releases showing examples of The Glenlivet from five decades, issued to support The Glenlivet Generations 70 year old bottling. All are available individually or in a limited edition set (50 only) for £2,850; these bottlings are not currently available in the U.S.

First-fill sherry wood makes a return here and adds its own rich dried fruitiness — think sultana cake — to the exotic whisky rancio notes of cheese rind, sealing wax, and roasting pheasant. As it opens, there’s fig, some peat smoke, black cherry, and concentrated stone fruits. This exotic/savory/sweet interplay continues on the tongue where there’s a surprising hint of mint and some pear blossom. The finish is long, with apple skin, gingerbread, and walnut. A discreet nod to cognac. £1,250 
      		
 
			
 
Amber color with shades of chestnut. Full, complex aromas of fruit (cherries, currants, berries), marzipan, Demerara sugar, roasted nuts, and molasses. Full in body, with flavors that deliver what its aroma promised. Satisfying finish. 

      		
 
			
 
A very richly textured Glenrothes. A heavy, honeyed maltiness provides the foundation of this whisky, with interwoven candied fruit notes (orange, tangerine, sultana), red and black licorice, toffee, and toasted almonds. Dry, spicy, oak notes balance its sweetness and provide depth. What impresses me most about this whisky is how it evolves on the palate and continues evolving through its lengthy finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Glenrothes is one of those Speyside whiskies which matures very gracefully. Recent distillery bottlings (i.e. the 1979 and 1972 vintages) prove this point. This Signatory bottling also demonstrates that Glenrothes has the ability to get older and better. In this offering, the palate-coating, sticky caramel, syrupy maltiness of the whisky is rescued by firm, bold dry oak spice and lush fruit. Delicious toffee and roasted nuts longer on the finish. The 30 years in oak gives this whisky great depth, and bottling the whisky at natural cask strength ensures that the whisky is not cut off at the knees. A soothing post-prandial affair. 

-> On page 29 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Antique gold, relatively light in color compared to the rest of the Highland Parks reviewed here. Nicely rounded on the nose and palate, and surprisingly youthful for such maturity. Mouth-coating texture. Quite fruity -- especially with some water -- with notes of honey-drenched citrus, sultana, key lime pie, and melon. Caramel and bitter chocolate notes emerge, with the chocolate and a wisp of smoke lingering on the finish. I could drink this all day and never tire of it. (Bottled for Virginia ABC)
      		
 
			
 
Rich, deep, and muscular on the nose and palate -- and very polished. Notes of caramel/butterscotch-coated citrus (lemon, Clementine) honeyed tropical fruit (coconut, pineapple), peaches and cream, creamy vanilla, and ripe barley, along with more subtle smoke, cut grass, and ginger. Firm, dry, resinous grip on the finish keeps all the sweetness in check. Rather expensive for its age, but not for its quality. Very impressive for a 12 year old! (Available only at the Highland Park distillery, their on-line shop, and in Scandinavia.)£65
      		
 
			
 
The second in a series of three high-strength, limited edition Highland Park whiskies, and a rather bold expression. Nicely sherried and noticeably smoky — more than a standard Highland Park. Quite spicy too — with cinnamon, but also ginger and nutmeg. Throw in some toffee apple, Cointreau, and waxed fruit for intrigue. Long, sherried, smoky finish. A very exciting whisky. (Not available in the U.S.)£85
      		
 
			
 
One of two recent vintage releases, this 1971 example has been matured in seventeen Spanish oak casks, that yielded a total of 657 bottles. Sweet on the nose, with maple syrup, almonds, and sherry. Soft and insinuating. Becoming progressively smokier. Bold fruit and peat notes on the palate, plus oak, cloves, and dark chocolate notes. Peppery in the long finish, with subtle tannins and persistent citrus fruits. 
      		
 
			
 
Lagavulin is a classic example of how smoke isn’t a blunt instrument that covers everything in a fog, but an element that works with all the flavors produced in distillation and maturation. Lagavulin isn’t ‘smoky,’ its peat moves into a weird territory of Lapsang Souchong tea and pipe tobacco, fishboxes and kippers. It smells of laurel and light cereal, but is always sweet. The palate shows more creosote, with hints of kelp and a little touch of iodine. Complex.
      		
 
			
 
Lagavulin from a first-fill sherry butt? There’s unusual. This is huge, fluxing, and complex, mixing saddles and dark chocolate, pu-erh tea and smothered kiln, geranium and velvet, gamey venison and treacle. The smoke is integrated, the fires ember-like, the oak there but not oppressively so. Massive, dense, layered, and complex, this needs time to open. In short, a distillation of Islay and up alongside last year’s Jazz Festival bottling.
      		
 
			
 
Though quiet to start, the impression is of a fog of smoke, balled up within a dunnage
warehouse, ready to erupt to add itself to the cool spearmint and oxidized
nuttiness. The palate is where it shows its class: mature, slowly unfolding and
layered, with Latakia tobacco, menthol, nori, white pepper, pear, and a massive,
tarry Bohea Souchong tea element on the finish. Everything from Lagavulin is
touched with gold at the moment. Try to find a bottle. 
£99
      		
 
			
 
Amber with gold streaks. Its aroma and flavor is fresh, powerful, and medicinal, with notes of peat smoke, band-aids, tar, rich toffee, seaweed, and brine. Thick in body, with an almost molasses-like viscosity. 

      		
 
			
 
Clean and complex, showing a matured, somewhat restrained personality for Laphroaig: less medicinal, but more rounded. Tar,
pencil shavings, anise, honeyed citrus, Spanish olive brine, and a hint of seaweed and white pepper on a bed of creamy vanilla, caramel, and light nougat. Lingering, satisfying finish. Frustrated by a dearth of 20-plus year old distillery-bottled Laphroaigs? Look no further. Delicious!
      		
 
			
 
Any sherried Laphroaig is welcome, and this does not disappoint. Rich, resinous, medicinal, with underlying soft fruits, the smoke is all-pervading, but never dominant. In other words, it isn’t just complex and balanced, but has that other dimension which elevates it in mind (and marks). With water, there’s antiseptic cream mingling with oxidized fruits and nuts; think 
. The palate shows storm clouds gathering over Texa. Rich dried fruits, cacao, and a ferny lift on the finish. Fantastic. (The Whisky Exchange only)  £100
-> On page 30 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Style: Speyside single malt scotch Color: Honey gold Aroma: Subtly complex. Floral (especially roses). Honeyed vanilla sweetness. Subtle notes of bourbon and bakers chocolate. Murray McDavid (distilled at Linkwood, 1973, 46%) cont. Palate: Nicely balanced and with great depth. Again the honey and vanilla, which marries beautifully with the floral, herbal, subtly fruity notes. Almonds and dried spice on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
There are light oaked notes to start, along with Oolong tea and very subtle smoke. These then shift into a mix of cedar and scented blossom. Classic, layered elegance with the cask offering support, not dominance. The fruits have that slightly eerie quality of decay, while the palate is deep and juicy. This is an exemplary, subtle, old whisky with delicate rancio (it’s a little cognac-like), which is given a boost of extra life with a small drop of water. £94
      		
 
			
 
The nose is fascinating, as if dust is cohering into form, and fruity form at that. When it emerges there’s baked banana, fruitcake, citrus peels, passion fruit, mango, mace flower, and nutmeg. A mossy edge anchors it to earth. Even livelier with water, this is a superbly balanced, mature whisky. The palate is pure, with big retronasal impact of the spice. Layered and long, it’s at its best neat; you need the intensity to amplify all the complexity. Superb.
      		
 
			
 
Solid amber color. Flavors are seamless, silky smooth, and rich, with notes of dried fruit and flowers, toffee, subtle spices, and delicate nuts. A great after dinner malt, but universal enough to drink anytime. 

      		
 
			
 
Deep amber color. Complex aromas of lush fruit (orange, lemon, red currant) and oak spices (cinnamon, clove, and licorice). Rich, silky body. Great balance and depth of flavor, with complex fruit and wood spices similar to its aroma all wrapped in toffee and vanilla fudge. Very long, evolving, and satisfying finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Deep amber color with crimson hues. Incredibly rich aromas of fruitcake, toffee, dates, roasted nuts, with a hint of cocoa powder and other spices. Rich and thick in body. On the palate, there are evolving notes of chewy toffee, ripe fruit (oranges, golden raisons), chocolate covered nuts, multigrain toast, and polished oak. Long, soothing finish. 

      		
 
			
 
This is my favorite of the three. For about $20 more, you get a richer, much more complex whisky than the 10 year old, and it is more balanced than the 21 year old. This 15 is drier than the 10, with lovely floral and spice notes (cinnamon, coriander, dried orange peel, lavender, rose), balanced by honey-laced complex fruit, and a dry, dark chocolate/orange marmalade finish 

      		
 
			
 
Rising above the tat issued to celebrate the nuptials of Prince William and Kate Middleton was this extremely limited (1,000 bottles) release from The Macallan. The nose is a mélange of rich fruits, marzipan, and beeswax/resin but it lifts with a drop of water to show apricot and heavy florals. The palate isn’t overly grippy, with more orange peel, almond, and characteristic oiliness. A malty/nutty smooth finish makes this a great one. £150 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Deep amber, mahogany color. Very mature and well-balanced. Notes of maple syrup on pancakes, roasted chestnuts, dates, pot still rum, burnished leather, maduro tobacco, and subtle Moroccan spice. Soft, stately finish. Older whiskies often show an exotic side to their personalities as they mellow out with age, especially if the wood influence doesn’t dominate. This is a very nice example of the genre. 

      		
 
			
 
Port Ellen’s make was usually filled into old casks to maximize its smoke when used young. To us, therefore, it’s Islay’s most austere malt, yet the guys who worked there all talk of its sweetness. Here, finally, is an example of that. Yes, there’s some wet slate and briny smoke, but it’s balanced by citrus, waxy fruits, and a central sweetness adding complexity. It might have taken a long time to get here, but it was worth the wait. (Editor's Choice)   
-> On page 31 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This single cask bottling of Scapa is a beauty! Brilliant gold color. Clean and fresh on the nose and palate, with complex bright fruit (peach, tangerine, golden delicious apple, honeydew melon, pineapple), spice (cinnamon, vanilla, subtle cocoa), appetizing brine, and beach pebbles, all on a bed of creamy, squeaky-clean honeyed malt. Dynamic, appetizing, briny, dried spice finish. A delicious, superbly balanced whisky that makes a great aperitif, but I could drink this any time. (Bottled exclusively for D&M Aficionado’s Club.)
      		
 
			
 
Aged in a first-fill sherry butt. Soft sherry notes, gentle toffee, golden raisin, green tea with honey, a peppering of spice (cinnamon, red and black licorice, candied ginger, hint of coconut macaroon and brine) and undertones of juicy oak (especially on the finish). Tame, somewhat seductive, and well-rounded. Not overly oaked, and I’m not finding any off notes. A lovely whisky, but not quite as dynamic as the “classic” Springbanks I’ve tasted from the 60s.
      		
 
			
 
This whisky starts out rich and lush-both in aroma and on the palate, with notes of fig cake, candied fruit, and sticky toffee pudding. Citrus fruit (orange, lemon, tangerine)-a characteristic that emerges with many older whiskies-cuts through the heft and lushness of this whisky, contributing complexity, balance and drinkability. The whisky continues to evolve, serving up notes of almonds, exotic spice, and polished leather on the finish. An excellent example of what a mature, Speyside whisky should taste like. 

      		
 
			
 
Some of these old G&M Strathisla whiskies are quite lovely, and this is one of them. It’s gently sherried, soothingly oily in texture, and complex, with notes of maple syrup, candied fruit, plum, roasted nuts, polished leather, and old oak, along with some damp earth, coffee bean, cinnamon, mint, and subtle, teasing kiln smoke. It’s soft, rounded, and still holds up nicely for a 44 year old whisky. If you like old, sherried Speysiders that aren’t overly oaked or sherried, you’ll like this one. If only it was bottled at 43% or 46% (or at natural cask strength, if it was less than 43%). It would give the whisky a little more backbone, and I might have bumped my rating up to the mid-90s. 

      		
 
			
 
I wish the owners of Strathisla would put out older expressions of their whisky, and here’s why. Layers of sweetness (caramel in particular, but also honey and toffee) dovetail beautifully with an array of lush fruit (orange, apricot, golden raisin, fruit gumdrops). All this is underpinned by subtle dried spice (cinnamon, cool mint, nutmeg) and teasing oak resin on the finish. What’s most impressive here isn’t the laundry list of flavors (although they certainly are there), but rather the balance. This, and its lovely depth, with no signs of lethargy. Impressive!

      		
 
			
 
Comes across initially to me as reserved, perhaps even elegant for a Talisker. Soothing too, with an oily texture. Quite fruity (orange, tangerine, apricot), perhaps even floral, with a delicate pastry sweetness. Then the more traditional Talisker notes kick in -- brine, seaweed, warming pepper -- repeated in the finish. A high-quality Talisker; albeit a bit reserved at times. I love the oily, viscous texture.
      		
 
			
 
Talisker is a Special Releases favorite, and this bottling, the oldest ever marketed by the distillery, is actually the sixteenth. Distillation was in 1977, and maturation has taken place in both American and European oak refill casks. Soft wood smoke, sultana, nutmeg, and chili powder on the nose. Dried fruits, vanilla, and malt merge with more chili and savory notes, plus newly-dug soil on the complex palate. A touch of brine, orange peel, and bonfire in the finish. 3,090 bottles. 
      		
 
			
 
This 27 year old Talisker has been aged in refill American oak casks, and the nose offers brine, wood smoke, wet tarry rope, slightly medicinal, with the emergence of milk chocolate. Big-bodied, with lots of peat accompanied by chili and smoked bacon, with sweeter notes of malt, fudge, and apple. A hint of fabric Elastoplast. Long in the finish, with rock pools, bonfire ash, and sweet, tingling spice notes which carry to the very end. A powerful beast, even by Talisker standards. 
      		
 
			
 
A deep, mature Tomintoul that manages to retain the elegance and drinkability found in younger Tomintoul whiskies. Roasted nuts, lush fruit, suggestions of cherry brandy and orange marmalade layered with rich fudge, toffee, and maple syrup. Soothing finish. Tomintoul can be a simple whisky at a younger age, but this one has matured into a beautifully complex dram. (Bottled for Park Avenue Liquors.) 

      		
 
			
 
Not what you’d expect from a malt at this age. Instead of oak dominating the nose, it's citrus in focus, with orange marmalade, candied orange, and even orange blossom. On the palate this whisky is light and delicate, leading with the citrus notes from the nose. This symphony of orange is followed with toffee, ginger, oak, and 
 in a combination that's well balanced and integrated. Unique for its age, a definite treat for those who prefer lighter and more delicate whiskies. (
)
-> On page 32 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Aged in a refill American oak cask. Quite lively for its age, and the oak (surprisingly and happily) plays a supporting role rather than dominating. Creamy and mouth-coating, with vanilla wafer, coconut cream pie, caramel, nougat, and bright fruit (sultana, apricot, tangerine, and pineapple in syrup). Soothing finish. A very nice whisky. (Not available in the U.S.)£450
      		
 
			
 
Darker, chewier than the Sazerac 18. Thicker, too, with more toffee and molasses in the middle, reminiscent of demerara rum. More wood and spice on the finish. Not as pristine as the Sazerac 18 (especially regarding the fruit notes), but with plenty of complexity and sheer entertainment to warrant a score in the 90s. 

      		
 
			
 
Distilled in 2002, this is the youngest of the collection, allowing the vibrancy and boldness of the rye grain to shine through (and an interesting comparison to the Sazerac 18 year old). Lush fruit, Seville orange, gin botanicals, fresh mint, golden raisin, dried pineapple, coconut, and honeydew melon, tamed by soothing caramel and vanilla. Lingering dried fruit and spice finish. Not excessively aggressive like some young ryes I’ve tasted. I really like the dark sugar notes and lushness in this year’s release that provide balance. One of the best Handys.
      		
 
			
 
Full-throttle rye, bottled uncut and unfiltered. Bold spice notes (cinnamon, allspice, mint), lush fruit (ripe orchard fruit, golden raisin), orange liqueur, and subtle coconut, all on a bed of caramel and honeyed vanilla. Clean and uncluttered. This isn’t a one-trick pony. It’s the sweetness and fruit that accompany the rye spice that makes this whiskey so attractive.
      		
 
			
 
Deeper, thicker, and more lush than the Madeira Cask Finish reviewed above. Notes of strawberry preserve, caramel apple, nougat, sponge cake, and a hint of chocolate cream pie. All these sweet, richly textured flavors without being cloying. Nicely done.
      		
 
			
 
This release is a port version of Amrut’s Intermediate Sherry — a sort of port pipe sandwich. The spirit is matured in both unused casks and bourbon casks, then spends a few months in port pipes, and then returns to bourbon casks. The result is a Pink Floyd show of a whisky: vibrant, colorful, complex, and nearly too much. A blackcurrant and wispy, smoky nose gives way to an intense and bittersweet mix of chili, blackcurrant, oak, damson, dark chocolate, and peat. Astounding. 
      		
 
			
 
The whisky gets its name from the fact that 57.1% ABV is 100 proof in the British measuring system: the alcohol concentration needed to sustain flaming gunpowder. It comes in 100 cl bottles and only 100 bottles are being released in each territory. This malt takes no prisoners, with big, bold flavors dominated by peat, but with chutney-style fruit and an array of spice making for a rich, intense taste experience.
      		
 
			
 
A whopping 90% malt and 10% grain whisky. Soft, with the oak remarkably restrained for its age. Soothingly sweet, with toffee apple, vanilla-spiked sponge cake, nougat, butterscotch, sultana, and cut grass. A dash of cinnamon and coconut throughout, with teasing, gentle polished oak on the finish. Deftly balanced and oh, so drinkable. 
      		
 
			
 
A marriage of Dalmore, Fettercairn, and Ardbeg, and their personalities certainly show. The whisky was blended and then aged for an additional 15 years -- very atypical. The marriage of the three really works very well, combining a rich sweetness (honeyed malt, toffee) with spice, brine, vanilla, bitter chocolate, charcoal, espresso, tobacco, cigar ash, subtle marmalade, and firm -- but not dominating -- leafy peat smoke. Thick, nicely-textured body, too. Lingering brine and smoke on the finish. Delicious as it is, I can only imagine what it would be like bottled at 46% and not chill-filtered. (I probably would be bumping it up a few points.)
      		
 
			
 
Aged 2.5 to 3 years on bourbon casks and then finished in sherry casks for 6 months. Wow, this is quite stunning! Old-fashioned in many respects: oily texture, with rooty, layered peat smoke, coal tar, shoe polish, and hints of wet sheep as the foundation for a complex array of additional flavors: toffee apple, caramel fudge, blackberry jam, golden raisin, grist, bourbon barrel char, and licorice root. Long, smoldering ember, dried herb, light toffee finish. It’s all balanced perfectly, and very mature for its age. If you like smoky whiskies, track one down. (Not available in the U.S.) £37.00
-> On page 33 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Aged for 225 months (18 years, 9 months). Only 225 bottles available, and only at one location: Heaven Hill’s Bourbon Heritage Center in Bardstown, KY. This is a lot of money for a bourbon, but if you do buy a bottle, you’re going to enjoy it. It’s spicy (especially on the nose), with cinnamon bark, spearmint, and nutmeg. The spice is balanced by an array of sweeter fruit notes (bramble, ripe orchard fruits), vanilla custard, fig, molasses, cola, and charcoal. Soft on the finish. Very polished and well-balanced. It’s much more mellow when compared to Heaven Hill’s other recent ultra-premium release, Parker’s Heritage Collection 27 year old.

      		
 
			
 
A high-strength blend that takes no prisoners. The color is full gold and the first thing that hits the nose is a complex mix of restrained smoke (sandalwood, cigar), fennel, and celery before semi-dried tropical fruits and orange peel take over. The palate also shows some of that mango character, but also crisp oak and a burst of sweet powdered spices on the finish. A malt-lover’s blend. £24.95 (50cl). Price in US dollars converted at time of review.
      		
 
			
 
Glann ar Mor is a rising star in the world of whisky, one of three very impressive distilleries in the Brittany region in Northern France, and this new single malt, fresh from the cask at the back end of September, is its finest release yet. A mixture of soft tinned fruits, especially sweet pears in syrup, sweet vanilla ice cream, and a delicate but assertive earthy underbed make this an utter delight. Magnifique. €57
      		
 
			
 
Kavalan is Taiwanese whisky from the King Car Company, and the progress its whiskeys are making is truly remarkable. With humidity roughly the same as Speyside — high — but the temperature more than 20° Fahrenheit  higher, maturation is on fast forward. This is just 4 years old, but it’s a monster mix of kumquat liqueur, tropical fruit, blackcurrant, and strawberry and cream candy. Later on some eastern spices, especially turmeric, bring it all back home. Remarkable. €70 Currently not available in the U.S.
      		
 
			
 
Rarely has a blend caused as much excitement as this one, but with good reason. This is also known as the Shackleton whisky, and is a recreation of the whisky abandoned in the Antarctic by explorer Ernest Shackleton more than 100 years ago. It has lemon, spring blossom, and wafts of smoke on the nose. The taste is full and citrusy, with peat and pepper in attendance. Beautifully balanced and outstanding, but there are just 50,000 bottles, so snap it up.
      		
 
			
 
Redbreast 12 year old is a classic pure pot still Irish whiskey; where can you go from there? This new 15 year old expression is more muscular (bottling at 46% and not chill filtering certainly helps), but there are trade-offs. It’s a bit closed on the nose (like a great Bordeaux wine that’s too young). I do enjoy the silky/oily texture, the bold resinous oak spice grip on the finish, and the rich nutty toffee, fig, black raspberry, chocolaty, chewy nougat throughout the palate. Still, it’s not as eminently drinkable, refined, or balanced as the 12 year old.
      		
 
			
 
Hugely different from the standard Drambuie: much more dryly herbal, and the whisky's right here in the nose...and yet, they are distinctly related in the base character of the herbs. The whisky is quite present — 15 year old Speyside malts shine like the sun on rippling water — but the flavors of Drambuie are clear as well. Still sweet, but the whisky is much more the star. A Drambuie for us?
      		
 
			
 
For six decades, Alberta Premium has been one of Canada’s favorite economy-brand mixers. Floral, herbal, and fruity, with charcoal and wet slate, this new addition to the lineup is clearly meant for connoisseurs. While the original is made entirely from rye grain, Dark Horse beefs up the flavor and body with a dollop of corn whisky and a sherry finish, creating a vanilla-rich symphony of pepper, hot ginger, pickle juice, and crisp, clean oak. C$30
      		
 
			
 
Well, the name's spot on because at that price it definitely brought tears to this writer's eyes. What a shame, because the liquid is eye-watering, too, a stunning big bruiser of a whiskey that coats the mouth as berry and green fruits battle it out with oak, spice, and grain oils — the whiskey equivalent to one of singer Sinead O'Connor's rants — powerful, impressive, a little bitter and twisted, utterly unforgettable, and unmistakably Irish. €135  
      		
 
			
 
Although the Prichard distillery is located in Lincoln County, it has a special exemption from using the Lincoln County Process and isn’t charcoal filtered.  The nose reflects that with bright aromas including caramel, cinnamon, and oak. The entry is sweet caramel corn followed by soft cinnamon and black pepper with a boost from some oak. A medium, slightly dry finish completes a very flavorful but still extremely easy-drinking Tennessee whiskey. This is the crown jewel of the Prichard distillery line.
-> On page 34 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This Blue Hanger has sherry and fruit on the nose, but it's all reined in. Then the palate is big, rich, complex, and fruity, and late oakiness from some 30 year-plus malt in the mix brings the perfect finale. £61
      		
 
			
 
What a success story. After six releases in a decade, there have been three just this year. This release is especially for the States, and it's a fireball. There are dried fruits and dusty bookshelves on the nose, and tropical fruits with water. On the palate it's a big, peaty, rich whisky with licorice and more of the pineapple, kiwifruit, and guava. You get the whole fairground in the finale, with candy, fruit, and smoke. Excellent.
      		
 
			
 
It’s the intensity of flavor that just grabbed me by the lapels and spun me round. It harbors intense tangelo juiciness; that unparalleled concentration of deep citrus skillfully mingled with dark vanilla, dried apricots, and gentle smoke. This goes the distance, delivering wave after delicious wave: peach juice, mandarin, pineapple cubes, and lemon zest. A firm, unctuous finish shows a little charred wood and dark sugar cloaked in fine smoke. Tongue pleasing and very special indeed. £90
      		
 
			
 
Deep amber color. Richly flavored aroma, with notes of toffee, raisins, dates, honeyed malt, and demerara rum. Medium in body and richly textured. Toffee & rum-like flavors entertain the palate first, followed by chocolate covered raisins and dates. The whiskey then begins to dry out mid-palate, as the 21 years in oak becomes evident, contributing notes of vanilla and subtle mint. Dry finish with lingering notes of oak and polished leather.
Style: Irish single malt whiskey. Price: about $120. Available in select markets.
This is a delicious whiskey that should appeal to both the Irish and Scotch whisk(e)y drinker. Aged initially in sherry and bourbon casks, the whiskey was then finished in Madeira casks. It is complex in flavor and very well balanced. It is one of the best Irish whiskeys on the market. This whiskey has been a long time comin', but it was worth the wait.
      		
 
			
 
The original Big Peat was a mix of smoky Islay malts and was already up there with the very best competition in the category, even though many of the others were bottled at cask strength. I scored it at 90. Now it’s back to play in the big boys' pool with a killer cask strength whisky of its own. This is to whisky what AC/DC is to heavy rock: old school, predictable, but great and exactly what fans want.
      		
 
			
 
From whisky connoisseur David Stirk's Exclusive Malts Single Cask Cask Strength range, this is a blend made with 80% malt, and it shows. This is a beauty. It's also a ‘traffic light’ whisky, with the sort of whisky 
 associated with the oldest whiskies up front, peaches and cream and pureed fruit in the center, and changing to oaky spiciness late on. Whisky with body, depth, and balance, which morph seamlessly. Very good indeed.
      		
 
			
 
The fourth release (and best so far) in Diageo’s Orphan Barrel series. This bourbon was distilled at what was then called the George T. Stagg distillery (now Buffalo Trace) and spent the last several years maturing at Stitzel-Weller. It’s nicely balanced and not over-oaked, with spice (clove, cinnamon), oak resin, and leather, along with sweet notes (honeyed fruit, soft vanilla, coconut custard) and a nice creamy texture. Better than most 20-plus year old bourbons on the market.
      		
 
			
 
Chocolate-covered raisins scoffed on a heathery moor, leather riding tack, intense plain chocolate, malt loaf, mixed nuts, Medjool dates, and traces of wood ash. A gorgeous, unctuous mouthfeel with flavors spun around bright sparks of orange, dark toffee, and rich maltiness, melding to black cherry, stewed fruits, licorice, and charred oak. Named for the leather golf balls packed with goose feathers used in the early 19
 century. Sink one for a birdie. From the bottlers of Sheep Dip. £39
      		
 
			
 
Rich, multi-layered nose: vanilla, cornmeal, berries (black raspberries, wineberries), and broad-shouldered oak. Powerful, but not overproof hot in the mouth; controlled. The berries sing a high counter-melody over the corn-oak beat as the whole experience rocks along. It’s powerful, sweet, authoritative, and finishes with a reprise of it all: berries, corn, vanilla, and stronger oak. Mature, complete bourbon with a 7 year age statement, and a real sleeper in the Small Batch Collection.
      		
 
			
 
Vanilla and oak nose, with a creamy layer of mint that warns you: Rye Ahead. And what a sweet rye wave it is, rolling in with green mint and grass, more bourbony oak and vanilla, lively spice on the top (with enough heat to keep it bold), and a finish that brings everything together. Beautifully integrated, and not overly woody, a tribute to the blending art of Canadian distillers. 
-> On page 35 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Aged in new French oak casks, with long-toasted heads. Deliciously creamy, sweet, toasty profile with coconut cream, toasted marshmallow, toffee pudding, and honeyed vanilla. Gentle spice notes (especially clove) and hints of fruit dance on the palate. Very soothing. (Bottled for Park Avenue Liquors.) 

      		
 
			
 
A marriage of two casks of Caol Ila (25 and 29 years old) and one cask of Imperial (14 years old). Penetratingly smoky, visceral, rooty, and even mean-tempered at times, ultimately being soothed by creamy vanilla and thick malt. It’s peppered with licorice stick, dark chocolate, campfire charcoal, subtle olive brine, and teasing berried fruit. Long, clinging finish. The flavors are nicely integrated and complex. Well done! (A limited release.)

      		
 
			
 
After a series of esoteric and expensive releases, Compass Box has decided to bring it all back to the people with a blend — and how! The journey sets out as we might expect; all sweet vanilla ice cream, stewed pear tart, and peach melba, but then a wave of spice and white pepper provides an unexpected but delightful twist. It’s like Spice Tree meets Hedonism…Spiconism if you like. 
      		
 
			
 
Smoke begins Jim Beveridge’s public replication of the annual Directors Blend concept, built around Johnnie Walker’s signature characteristics. Peat smoke harks back to Islay, but there’s wood smoke, tobacco leaf, and malt, with a salty richness behind it. The grain just gives it a lift of extra sweetness. Polished, with great structure; red apple, raspberry, and sweet linctus wrap up with a long, smoky finish of cigar stub and peat stores. Clear parallels with Directors Blend 2009, but better. (8,888 decanters released) £500
      		
 
			
 
Available for several years, but now finally making its debut in the U.S. The higher-end Dewar’s expressions (Dewar’s 12 year old and Dewar’s Signature) are very good blends. This one is situated smartly between the two. The malt proportion is rich and creamy; the grain whisky is crisp and well-integrated. Antique gold color, with notes of butterscotch, vanilla wafer, strawberry rhubarb pie, and citrus drizzled with honey. Lovely floral notes in the aroma, along with a pleasing, dried spice finish. I could drink this stuff all day long!
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in 2002. For many years now, this wheated whiskey has maintained just the right amount of oak influence for balance and added complexity. This year’s release is sporting some extra dried oak spice (especially on the finish), but it’s still a delicious whiskey. Notes of toffee, maple syrup, blackberry jam, cinnamon, and vanilla, with a dry, allspice and polished leather finish.
      		
 
			
 
The first four-grain, 100% copper pot-distilled bourbon in many decades. The flavors are distinctive, silky-textured, and seamless. Bright fruit notes of berries and citrus are balanced nicely by maple syrup, caramel and toffee. The whiskey is quite nutty too and delicately spiced with vanilla, mint, and cinnamon. It finishes pleasingly smooth and polished. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in a Cabernet Franc barrel for 8 years after spending 6 years in new charred oak barrels. Bright amber, with maple syrup, vanilla, candy corn, white chocolate, cinnamon, and ripe berried fruit. Nice tannic grip, especially on the finish. Great balance between the sweetness, fruit, and tannins. This is what finishing is all about: giving more than it takes away (or masks). Nicely done! 

      		
 
			
 
Smooth, with gently layered sweet notes; nicely balanced. The least amount of oak and just a peppering of cinnamon and mint influence compared to the other four releases. It’s the most versatile of the four too.Not as complex as the “Rye 125”, but it makes up for this with its inviting drinkability and balance. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Complex and robust, with the biggest body of the group here. Very spicy (brisk clove, evergreen, warming cinnamon), but a solid sweet underbelly of toffee, caramel, and vanilla balances it. Its dry spicy finish makes a bold statement, without crossing the line. Very nice! Price is per 375 ml.
-> On page 36 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Often ignored because it’s not barrel proof like the other bourbons in the collection. The past couple years have shown a gradual increase in oak spice and resin. This year’s offering particularly sports unnecessary oak, showing more leather, dried spice (especially cinnamon), barrel char and tannins than needed to marry with the toffee, caramel, rum, mocha, dried fruit, and tobacco notes. Still very enjoyable, but slightly past its prime.
      		
 
			
 
Amber gold. Delicately complex teasing aromas, with a potpourri of spices, floral notes, and complex fruit (oranges, plum, pineapple, coconut). Soft and smooth in texture. Impeccably balanced flavors and subtly complex, with notes of exotic fruit, subtle spices, almonds and soft honey tones. 

      		
 
			
 
Big and spicy, but contrasted by layers of sweetness. Vibrant dried spice (warming cinnamon, crisp mint, nutmeg, and cigar box), caramel, nougat, black raspberry, dried citrus, and a hint of chocolate fudge laced with coconut. Very warming on the finish, with a nice resinous grip without being over-oaked. A very dynamic whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
A delicious base of creamy vanilla and rich caramel, complemented by tropical fruit (coconut, pineapple, ripe mango), golden raisin, and raspberry preserve, and jazzed up with spice (cocoa, cinnamon, nutmeg). Polished oak on the finish. The flavors are nicely integrated. My favorite of the last several annual releases.
      		
 
			
 
Heaven Hill’s first wood-finished bourbon. Finished for several months in cognac casks (reminiscent of Beam’s Distillers’ Masterpiece offering around a decade ago), which show nicely without dominating. Very silky and smooth in texture. Notes of graham cracker, dark fleshy fruit (ripe grape, blackberry brandy), light toffee, maple syrup on pancakes, and creamy vanilla. Great balance, distinctive, and perilously drinkable for 100 proof.
      		
 
			
 
A blend of two different 11 year old bourbons—one being a rye-based bourbon, the other being wheat-based. The wheat lends drinkability, while the rye contributes a spicy zing. The combination works very nicely, with light toffee, nutty caramel, nougat, soft orchard fruit, black cherry, vanilla, and cinnamon. (Note: this is the first of three different batches that will eventually be bottled.)
      		
 
			
 
There was an Aberlour 18 on the market for a spell several years ago, aged in sherry casks, that I really enjoyed. Now we have this new 18 year old expression. There are big shoes to fill, and this whisky fills them quite nicely. Once again, the sherry is prominent throughout, with its lush fruit, velvety texture, and sweet demeanor. But it’s not cloying or sappy — the sherry blends in nicely with the rest of the flavors. Ripe orange, apricot preserve, peach cobbler, chocolate-covered caramel, and toffee, with a sprinkling of cinnamon and cocoa. Rich, silky smooth, satisfying finish. Very impressive. The Aberlour 18 year old’s reputation remains intact!
      		
 
			
 
The follow-up to last year’s Ardbeg Day, here’s the cult distillery in its funkiest
guise with a nose that’s reminiscent (I’d imagine) of a frontier trading post:
all pitch, furs, and gun oil. Some mint hangs around in the background
alongside eucalyptus. This is an earthy, in-your-face Ardbeg with a hint of
box-fresh sneakers indicating some youthfulness. The mouth is thick and chewy:
wild mint, oily depths, and the slightly manic energy typical of Ardbeg’s young
years. Editor's Choice.
      		
 
			
 
Pale and slightly flinty to start, with touches of Caol lla-style salt-washed rocks, but here there’s sweetness, while the smoke gives it a mezcal-like air; pears and burning wood (hot brake pads), minerality, then green olive and a light medicinal note. With water, sashimi-style cleanliness. The palate is rounded, with real olive oil, peppery sweetness, soot, and white chocolate. A real ‘palate whisky,’ filled with bare-faced bravado.  A great Ardbeg.
      		
 
			
 
I feel this is by far the best whisky in the standard Auchentoshan portfolio, and it is one of the best Auchentoshans ever released. It’s delicious, nicely balanced, and with lovely depth for a Lowland whisky. Baked muffins, creamy vanilla, honey, and caramel blend nicely with delicate fruit notes (lemon, red current, strawberries). An impeccably balanced whisky. Similar to the 10 year old reviewed below, but with greater depth and a drier finish. 

-> On page 37 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The latest Balblair release is a 1995 vintage expression, exclusive to global travel retail outlets. Matured in second-fill bourbon casks, Balblair 1995 is non-chill filtered and naturally colored. Initially very fruity on the nose, with peaches and carnations, icing sugar on bonbons, then a faint sprinkling of black pepper. Stewed fruits on the early palate, full and confident, with developing spices and brittle toffee. Relatively lengthy in the finish, with dark chocolate and soft oak. Price is per 1 liter.
      		
 
			
 
One of the finest Balvenie 15 year olds I’ve tasted. The flavors are clean, well defined, confident, and beautifully balanced. Full malty foundation (with some ripe barley thrown in). Soft, creamy vanilla, honeycomb, bright fruit (orange, nectarine, lemon peel, hints of pineapple), with emerging dried vanilla, coconut, oak resin, and subtle anise. Polished oak finish. It doesn’t have the depth that the classic older Balvenies have shown in the past, but what it does have, it has in spades. Beautiful! (A Julio’s Liquors exclusive.)
      		
 
			
 
This newbie from Balvenie is the worldwide replacement for the market-specific Tun 1401. A larger volume vat (8,000 liters) is now being filled with an equally eclectic mix of casks (42 casks ranging from 1970 to 1992). Deep amber; this has substance but being Balvenie, it’s gentle: orange blossom/Manuka honey edged with spice, marmalade, scented woods, and a little frangipane. The palate shows a supple, rippling power with some apricot, cinnamon, and root ginger. Awfully good. £230
      		
 
			
 
Sweet and sherried, with plenty of sugar and toffee, moving into plums and thick chestnut honey. Give it time, however, and a haunting note of dried mango and guava emerges, followed by amontillado-style nuttiness and then beeswax polish. All in all, just what you want from a gently-aged BenRiach. The palate may seem initially grippy, but there’s such a massing of fruits that it copes well. Keep neat for maximum impact. Superb. £180
      		
 
			
 
Amber chestnut color. Aromas of rich sherry, ripe fruit, toffee, molasses, peat smoke, damp oak, and nuts. Medium to full in body. Its flavors start out rich and sweet, with sherried fruit, toffee, and dark chocolate. It then becomes drier with notes of peat, smoked nuts, seaweed and brine, ultimately finishing with notes of spice, bitter chocolate, and smoky smoldering embers. 

   Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: approx. $160. Available at specialty retailers nationwide. 

   This is a new bottling of Bowmore 25 year old and an improved one at that. It is richer, fuller, and more balanced than its predecessor. A wonderful dram indeed. The 17 year old was my favorite of the standard Bowmore line. Not anymore.
      		
 
			
 
This replaces the 17 year old in the standard Bowmore portfolio. (The 17 year old will now be Duty Free Only.) The difference is significant. This one is more sherried than the 17 year old, and it wears the sherry well. I know that many of you, like myself, adore the 17 year old. Indeed, I feel that the 17 year old displays the true essence of Bowmore. But this 18 year old integrates the sherry notes with the Bowmore signature to create a richly flavored Islay whisky experience. Thick toffee, ripe fruit, and tar-tinged smoke are accentuated by dark chocolate, cocoa powder, burnt raisin, dates, and sea salt. Long, entertaining finish. 

      		
 
			
 
A very clean, elegant Bowmore with a naked beauty that shows its Islay roots. You’ll find fresh brine and seaweed on a bed of honeyed malt and soft vanilla cream. Subtle berries, citrus, and melon fruit add a complex fruit dimension. Fresh, appetizing finish. Nicely done! (Exclusive to The Party Source.)
      		
 
			
 
Quite lively for 25 years, with layers of bright fruit (lemon, nectarine, grapefruit, pineapple) on a bed of vanilla and honey. There’s a peppering of dried spice, smoldering ember, and beach pebbles. Lightly smoky, dried spice finish. Very nice. Brora enthusiasts will not be disappointed, but the prices of the whisky from this shuttered distillery are creeping up.

      		
 
			
 
Gold color with amber hues. Mature aromas of toffee and nuts, marzipan and candied fruit. Medium body and chewy in texture. A very mature whisky with evolutions of flavors-toffee, caramel, fudge, nuts, fruitcake, and a long finish that dries out very nicely.

   Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: approx. $130. Available nationwide. 

   Older expressions of Bunnahabhain are often quite delicious, and this one is no exception. The dryness of the oak balances perfectly with the sweeter toffee notes of the whisky, and the extra age imparts considerable depth.
      		
 
			
 
Although aged in refill, then active hoggies, and finally sherry, there’s more smoke
than oak here, a smoke like the aroma of a fire clinging to a tweed jacket. A
note akin to wilting spinach gives way to more conventional strawberries and
cream, but always mixed with seashore breezes. This is Caol Ila in deep and
bold mood with green fig, banana, and a sweet center. Water gives greater
integration. You might (just) be able to get this. Do it. 
£99
-> On page 38 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Clearly Caol Ila; it’s the way that the oily smokiness seems to lean into the nose, bearing with it wet oilskins, a barely smoldering wood fire, light seashore elements (drying crab shells), and very pure fruit, which then opens to classic smoked ham aromas. Retronasally, there’s a touch of green pea pod. The smokiness is more assertive than normal on the tongue, with olive oil, deep fruits, and a pine-scented juniper note. Another belter. 
£155
      		
 
			
 
There’s something enigmatic and highly attractive about this distillery and its deceased brother, Brora. Perhaps it’s the unpredictability; there are plenty of independent releases of varied and often questionable quality, and you’re never quite sure what’s going to turn up. Even iconic expressions such as the 30 year olds can vary from quite sublime to appalling and sulfury when in the wrong hands.
When the malts from both distilleries are good, though — and the official bottlings tend to be — they’re very, very good. This Clynelish is a delightful surprise from the beginning, its nose some way removed from the official 14 year old, and more in common with some recent Diageo-release Broras, mixing soft maritime notes with squiggly peat and some fruit notes. The palate is complex and attractive, with savory peat, sweet pineapple, salt, light fish, drizzled lemon, pepper, chili, and cardamom. It all makes for a big, complex, evolving (and grown up) whisky — and great value for the price tag. 
      		
 
			
 
The question is how this stacks up against the Friends of the Classic Malts bottling, one of my 2014 highlights. This shows mature distillery character with that discreet meaty undertow bedding down exuberant top notes: icing sugar on rhum baba, preserved lime, crystallized fruits, honey, pecan, fig, and scented woods. Typical of Cragganmore in its constantly shape-shifting character. The palate is concentrated orchard fruits, dried fruits, light spice, chestnut puree, and a little smoke. So yes, in the same league. (3,372 bottles)
      		
 
			
 
A tribute to the Mackenzie Clan. Aged in bourbon barrels for 11 years, and then aged an additional 6 years in port pipes, creating a rich, voluptuous, robust Dalmore expression. Notes of toffee, molasses, caramelized nuts, pancake batter, fig cake, and chocolate-covered citrus. Subtle glazed ginger and orange marmalade add complexity. Polished oak, tobacco-tinged finish. Very dynamic and never sappy or cloying. Save this one for after dinner.
      		
 
			
 
Staff members at Dalmore selected this distillery-exclusive bottling, which has been drawn from American white oak cask number 446, and bottled at cask strength. The out-turn comprises 450 bottles. Refined, polished oak on the nose. Honey, marzipan, caramel, and vanilla. Fragrant, with old leather and over-ripe oranges when water is added. Warm leather, apricots, orange marmalade, cocoa powder, and developing spice on the palate. A long, spicy, citric finish. Finally, licorice. £150
      		
 
			
 
Initially filled into an ex-bourbon cask, then transferred into a Gonzales Byass oloroso ‘Matusalem’ sherry butt in 2005 for four years, before a final two years in a freshly-emptied bourbon barrel. The nose is initially floral, with overripe Seville oranges, figs, ginger, and cocoa powder. Peaches and almonds on the palate, before dark fruits and salted nuts appear. Drying oak is held at bay, and the final note is fat and figgy. Cask number 14; 233 bottles.
      		
 
			
 
Glen Grant’s new(ish) owner Campari is putting its money where its mouth is. Investment in plant, wood, and an impressive visitor center is slowly being backed up with a series of new releases. This venerable example comes from Gordon & MacPhail’s stocks, but is an official bottling due out in time for Christmas. This is GG in relaxed, avuncular mode: subtle woods, amber, Oolong tea, anise. The palate is old apple, fresh plum, cream, and ginger spiciness. £255(Available at the distillery, in France, and Travel Retail in Asia only.)
      		
 
			
 
Dark, chestnut-copper color suggests a sherry cask, and one nosing confirms it. A very multi-faceted whisky-the sherry is quite profound, but there’s a lot going on in addition to the sherry. Deep, succulent, and chewy on the palate, with fig cake, raisins, old rum, tobacco, pencil shavings, and almond fudge. Quite a mouthful! 

      		
 
			
 
First things first — congratulations to the Grants of Glenfarclas on attaining their 175th anniversary. To celebrate, they have vatted together a cask from 1952 with one each from the following five decades — and released it at an exceptionally reasonable price! The nose has a lift of struck match immediately followed by cedar, pomegranate, blackberry jam, and Seville orange. There’s a thick caramel toffee sweetness to the palate alongside the classic ’Farclas depth where dried, but sweet, fruits repose. Recommended.  £80 (Dave Broom) (Value Pick) 
      		
 
			
 
Another first fill sherry butt, giving its typical reddish-brown hue. This runs more into the clove, cassia, and allspice area than just dried fruit. While maturity is obvious, and there’s even a hint of dunnage/leatheriness, it is the concentrated fruit sweetness that surprises here. The distillery has fought back against the cask, and while still crepuscular in nature, there is a rich, concentrated, and mellow glow at its heart. £345
-> On page 39 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Only 60 bottles have been released from this 60 year old first-fill sherry cask. Amazingly, the nose is not dominated by wood, but is mature and concentrated with the aroma of rain-moistened tweed, tropical fruit, blonde tobacco, cedar, and chanterelle mushroom. This elegantly faded, sepia-tinted impression continues on the tongue: fine-boned, mossy, clean, and slowly drying. A classic example of oxidation, not woodiness, allowing
freshness to be retained. Amazing. 
£6,000
      		
 
			
 
Very elegant and refined. Obviously this whisky was aged in a pristine sherry cask. The flavors are quite clean and well-defined. Gently sweet and fruity, with golden raisin, candy apple, and red raspberry jam. There’s delicate pineapple, dried cherry, coconut, and vanilla too, with a polished oak finish. A very classy Glenfiddich. Not as bold and spicy as last year’s 1976 vintage (which I had a hand in selecting but, ironically, don’t like as much). This new vintage approaches the caliber of the 1973 Vintage release from two years ago which I still think is the best one in recent years. 

      		
 
			
 
The first release from the new owners of Glenglassaugh distillery is obviously intended as a showpiece expression, and it does not disappoint. Due in the States next year. Damp moss and cedar on the early nose. Sultanas, candied orange, maraschino cherries, and sherry. Treacle notes in time. Spicy fruits, figs, brittle toffee, sherry, and ginger on the mellow yet robust palate. The finish is medium in length, with allspice and old oak, plus a wisp of tarry smoke. £245
      		
 
			
 
Deep gold color. Incredibly complex, subtle aromas of vanilla, honey, marshmallow, tropical fruit (pineapple, peaches, coconut), floral notes and a hint of almonds. Medium-full in body, and firm. On the palate, the flavors are complex and exhibit the same notes as the aroma, starting out gently sweet, but gradually becoming fruity and eventually drying out on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Richly textured with mouth-coating malt that is balanced by an array of lively fruit (fresh peach, nectarine, tangerine, pears in honey, and delicately caramelized pineapple). Creamy caramel, crème brûlée, anise, and subtle toasted marshmallow add complexity, as does its gently spicy, pleasingly dry finish. Two years older than the standard 16 year old Nadurra (which I like for its vibrancy and freshness). This new Triumph 1991 is richer and more textured, with more caramelized sugars, riper barley, and greater fruit impact. More mouth-coating too. (Exclusive to the U.S.)

      		
 
			
 
A vatting of three first-fill American oak casks, for me this is the most lifted and effusive of the ongoing Cellar Collection range. The nose is full of aromas of anise, blackcurrant leaf, honeysuckle, jasmine, frangipani flowers, and a subtle almond sweetness. The palate continues in similar vein with more spice and just sufficient oak to add distinct structure and a coconut character. Sublime. It won’t, however, be released in the U.S. £1,000
      		
 
			
 
Quite deep for a Glenmorangie, but still surprisingly balanced. Glenmorangie is a lighter-style spirit and, in the past, some of the older vintage expressions were heavy-handed on the wood. The oak aging is obvious on the nose, but this whisky manages to walk the thin line between enjoying the maturity and depth of an older whisky without too much oak influence.

      		
 
			
 
The most recent vintage from the 1980s. This whisky is very bright and lively. It dances on the palate with orange, tangerine, and lemon gum drops, balanced by vanilla, light caramel, hint of anise, and delicate oak. A whisky with great finesse and drinkability. 

      		
 
			
 
More polished and sophisticated than the comparably sweet and lush Lagavulin 21 year old also reviewed here. The 
 cask finish certainly gives as much as it takes away when compared to the benchmark 16 year old. An array of complex ripe fruit, interwoven with notes of pot still rum, toffee, tar, seaweed, and brine on the finish. It seems logical to marry this big, smoky Islay whisky with an equally big, sweet, fruity sherry. In this case, the marriage works wonderfully.

      		
 
			
 
You want and expect rich and peaty malt from Lagavulin and you get it here in droves, though not in the most obvious way. This version is somewhere between the cask strength 12 year old and the Distiller’s Edition, rather than the standard 16 year old, but it’s an absolute peach and a treat for lovers of this distillery. The nose is constrained and shy at first, with lychee and kiwi fruit offering a sweet and gentle carpet to coastal peaty notes. The palate is big, rich, full, and peppered, with sharp apple and citrus fruits. It benefits from water, too, as there’s a delightful swell of fruit, chili, peat, and soft licorice. As with all great Lagavulins, the tarry peatiness lingers longest in the finish.
-> On page 40 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Deep amber color. Wonderfully complex, and nicely balanced aroma and flavor of vanilla sweetness, tarry rope, oak, toffee, seaweed, and brine. Medium to full in body, and creamy in texture, with a finish that doesn't quit.
      		
 
			
 
The whisky begins sweet and creamy, with notes of vanilla, honey, and ripe malt (reminiscent of a malting floor). Then the Laphroaig signature peat smoke, seaweed, tar, and medicinal notes emerge. Bottling at 48% and without chill-filtering keeps the whisky from being dulled down. A whisky that is very dynamic. Nicely done. 

      		
 
			
 
Bottled at 46% and not chill-filtered. Smart move! It really helps this whisky. This is a soft — almost elegant — Laphroaig (if that’s not an oxymoron). Very clean, with honeyed malt, ripe barley, brine, seaweed, and peat smoke, with just a teasing of the medicinal, band-aid notes that Laphroaig is known for. The owner-bottled 18 year old, which I rated a 90, is darker and drier, with more oak on the finish. I like this Hart Brothers expression just a little better.
      		
 
			
 
Macallan’s 18 year old expression is, for me, the highlight of its regular sherried range. Deep amber in color. The nose is rich and heavily fruited: fruit cake, mulberry, a little moist gingerbread, the bloody depths of molasses. On the palate, dried fruits — more figgy than raisined — while the natural oiliness in the spirit balances the boisterous tannins from the European oak. A singed note on the finish (an extension of the molasses?) completes the picture. Balanced and complex.
      		
 
			
 
Dark mahogany with ruby glints and a green rim. Lots of highly-polished oak as we move out of the woods and into a silent country estate. Wax polish and masses of whisky rancio. Sherry-soaked oak, dry leaves, currants, and ripe blackberry. Highly concentrated, but the fruits push their way through only lightly-resisting tannins. There’s a hint of smoke and Seville orange bitterness on the finish. My pick of the quartet. Excellent. 285 bottles. 
      		
 
			
 
With worm tubs and a fiendishly complex partial-triple distillation, Mortlach has adhered to an old style of making whisky — and older, richer, darker flavors. Big and bold, it is at its best in ex-sherry casks. The nose is meaty (think gravy/beef stock) with fig, raisin, and molasses. In the mouth it’s concentrated, with good grip and a savory sweetness. A cult malt. £41 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Surprisingly fresh - sanguine even - for its age, and appetizingly aromatic. Fairly light and approachable in body, but always inspiring and pithy. Notes of fresh, seabreeze brine, teasing exotic spices, and tangerine are softened by gently creamy malt notes and hints of coconut and almond. Very delicious and enjoyable anytime.
      		
 
			
 
The oldest bottling of Old Pulteney to date has been matured in American bourbon and Spanish sherry casks, and was personally bottled by distillery manager Malcolm Waring. The nose of this highly accomplished veteran is fragrant and waxy, with cooking apples, milk chocolate orange, Christmas spices, vanilla, and fudge. Initially, the substantial palate offers spicy fresh fruits, seasoned timber, then a hint of brine, with sultanas and plain chocolate. The finish is figgy, gingery, and sherried.  £1,490
      		
 
			
 
Amber color. Full aroma of peat smoke, with interwoven notes of seaweed, burning leaves, leather, and fudge. Medium in body, with a slight oily texture. Powerful and evolving in flavor, with great depth. It begins somewhat sweet up front with notes of vanilla and toffee, followed by a peat smoke explosion. Lingering notes of seaweed, oak, salt and pepper add complexity. Finally, the whisky becomes slightly sweet again, with lingering smoke. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in a bourbon hogshead, allowing the distillery character to shine through. Fresh, lively and inviting (especially for its age), with a complex array of tropical and summer fruit, peppered with brine, vanilla, and a hint of baker’s chocolate. An oily texture adds weight. Dry, deliciously appetizing finish. An excellent aperitif whisky, but enjoyable anytime. 
-> On page 41 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This replaces the 17 year old in the standard Bowmore portfolio. (The 17 year old will now be Duty Free Only). The difference is significant. This one is more sherried than the 17 year old, and it wears the sherry well. I know that many of you, like myself, adore the 17 year old. Indeed, I feel that the 17 year old displays the true essence of Bowmore. But this 18 year old integrates the sherry notes with the Bowmore signature to create a richly flavored Islay whisky experience. Thick toffee, ripe fruit, and tar-tinged smoke are accentuated by dark chocolate, cocoa powder, burnt raisin, dates, and sea salt. Long, entertaining finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Fresh and lively for its age, with appetizing saltiness, citrus fruit (lemon, line and orange marmalade), and subtly complex dried spices. A fat, malty foundation complements these seasonings beautifully mid-palate, with the salt and dried spices emerging again on the finish. Very sophisticated. 

      		
 
			
 
Significantly darker than the rest, well-balanced, and palate-coating. Softer, not as intense or as dry as the 30 year old. Creamier too, with subtle, yet exotic notes of tropical fruit and exotic spices. There is a point at which ultra-aged spirits -- whether they are whisky, rum, tequila, or brandy -- find a common ground. What they lose in identity, they gain in intrigue and layers of subtle complexity (if properly matured). This whisky fits into that category. Contemplative and ethereal in nature.
      		
 
			
 
Drier, less toffee and fruit, more dried spice and oak when compared to the standard Oban 14 year old.  A beautiful combination of rich, nutty toffee balanced by polished oak, salt, pepper, seaweed, distant smoke, and dried fruit.  Somewhat oily in texture.  Wonderful depth, too!  An improvement on what is already the biggest-selling Diageo single malt scotch in the U.S.  Very exciting and dynamic.  (7,700 bottles available only in the U.S. and at the Oban distillery).

      		
 
			
 
Matured in a sherry cask. Lush, with glazed citrus, caramelized peach, chewy toffee, roasted nuts, and subtle pine needles. The sherry is a driving force throughout this whisky, but it’s obviously from a very clean, polished European oak cask. Very delicious, with a long, satiating finish. Quite impressive for such a young whisky. My favorite of the bunch. (534 bottles) £300
      		
 
			
 
This whiskey has been getting intermittently softer and less vibrant since the 2005 release. Additionally, the 2009 release is slightly sweeter on the palate when compared to last year’s release. Is this good or bad? That depends on how you like your rye whiskeys. Personally, I’d like to see more rye zing, but the pleasing, soothing nature (for a rye) in this new release makes up for it. Notes of toffee, cinnamon, creamy vanilla, date, mocha, bramble, glazed citrus, soft mint, and dusty spice (nutmeg, cocoa), with a dry, polished leather finish. I like it slightly better than last year’s release, which I rated an 87. That was my least favorite vintage over the past five years. This new vintage is still not up to those classic Sazerac 18’s bottled in the first half of this decade, which I consistently rated 95 and higher.
      		
 
			
 
Powerful, lush, and boldly spicy. A mouth-coating, invigorating rye whiskey with chewy toffee, fig cake, and candied fruit penetrated by thumping mint, warming cinnamon, and clove, ultimately revealing more subtle notes of allspice, coconut, and nutmeg. Long, delicious finish. An amazingly vibrant whiskey that lets you know you’re alive. The American whiskey equivalent of a young, cask-strength Islay single malt scotch or an imperial IPA
      		
 
			
 
Very much in the same vein as the Rittenhouse Rye, with just a bit more oak, spicy, heat, and some leather on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Mackmyra has made its name on the back of salty, often peaty whiskies, but this is a revelation. It's a spring whisky, with much in common with Bladnoch in the Scottish Lowlands or peated Connemara from Ireland: sweet apple and pear flavors flit over wispy drying smoke. Sweden is represented by juniper, but there is blackcurrant, while cinnamon plays a role, too. Subtle, sweet, and sexy. £110
      		
 
			
 
In my opinion Cutty Sark 25 year old is one of the great blends, so a new version was always going to be a big ask. This one comes with a lot of packaging, so is it a victory for style over substance? Not at all. This is all about big flavors; burnt orange, juicy raisin, and dark chocolate; rich oak and exotic spice. A treat, and worthy of its heritage. But at that price—and bearing in mind it's a limited edition—are you going to open it? 
-> On page 42 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Although this whisky was distilled at CC’s sister plant in Alberta, the dried dark fruit signature of Canadian Club is evident as soon as you open the cap. Elegant, but never subdued; cloves, nutmeg, and allspice play off the fruit and underlying notes of clean grain dust. Vanilla and rich woody tones indicate at least some virgin oak barrels were used for its 7 year maturation. Rich caramels soften a gently glowing heat. Complex and beautifully balanced. 
Value Pick.
      		
 
			
 
A new line of Islay single malts from Specialty Drinks, an extension of The Whisky Exchange. (The bottle doesn’t tell you which distillery this whisky came from, but if you look at a map of Islay you can probably figure it out.) I like this expression better than the more expensive 25 year old. There’s impeccable balance and more vibrancy in this 17 year old, with seaweed, smoked Spanish olive, coal soot, pencil shavings, citrus, and anise, along with subtle kipper and picked ginger. All this is layered on a bed of oily, honeyed malt. Salty, peppery, sooty, tarry finish. Nicely done! £50
      		
 
			
 
The first thing I wrote was, “classic Kilchoman.” Then I paused…because it’s true. Though still young, here’s a distillery that has established its own character. In this expression you get full integration between oak and distillery, a sparkling mix of seashell and the freshness of seaweed, touched with churned butter, driftwood, and fresh-kilned peat. On the tongue, there’s samphire, peat, sweet barley, and an herbal kick. This is Kilchoman coming of age, assured and confident.
      		
 
			
 
Soft, soothing, and gentle. Layered fruit (bright orchard fruit, honeyed melon, kiwi, pineapple), polished oak, and hay, subtly spiced with vanilla bean, milk chocolate, evergreen, and cotton candy. Bottled at peak maturity. Very more-ish, too! (A Park Avenue Liquor exclusive.)
      		
 
			
 
After being around for about a decade, it’s nice to see this whiskey finally being sold in the U.S. Soft, sweet, and silky smooth, with creamy vanilla, caramel, toasted marshmallow, and honey-kissed tropical fruit (mango, pineapple, coconut). I get most of the barley on the front of the palate, with the grain whiskey components more on the finish. Something seems slightly missing for me to elevate this whiskey to classic status (some more pot still character, perhaps?), but it’s still a wonderful blended Irish whiskey, and so drinkable. Gather a bunch of friends and throw away the cork!
      		
 
			
 
Any lingering doubts that English whisky means business are dispelled by this whisky masterclass. This is a New Orleans show band of a whisky, bursting with vibrancy and happy, celebratory notes. The cask is all over this, with rum and raisin, milk chocolate, and mocha contributing to an all-round sweet treat. Not too sweet, though; and the malt at the center of this sings. £65
      		
 
			
 
This oldie (from a distillery which closed in 2000) seems pretty straightforward compared to the Mizunara [see following review], but has less dried fruit than the sherry note on the label might suggest. Think dried peels rather than raisin, then stir in some freshly-polished floor. The aromas are saturated and heavy — almost as if they are drifting towards you on humid air.
The palate shows light smoke and then a pleasant quinine bitterness mid-palate. This has the Japanese quality of laying flavors out very precisely on the tongue while also heightening their intensity. Water reduces the quinine effect, allowing the richness of the spirit to come through. Hanyu was a pretty big and firm (even rigid) whisky. Here that shell has cracked, allowing anise and blueberry to come through.
£450. Price in US dollars was converted at time of review.
      		
 
			
 
A celebration of Nikka’s 80
 anniversary, and, in the spirit of the founding principles of Masataka Taketsuru, it’s a blend. The oldest cask here is Yoichi from 1945, there’s also a Miyagikyo from 1969. Only 900 bottles have been made. Huge whisky 
, delicate smoke, light varnish, wax, hints of incense, and while rich, there is still remarkably fresh tropical fruit. Tasted blind, it could easily be mistaken for a Grand Champagne Cognac. Amazing length and purity. Sophisticated. €3,600
      		
 
			
 
Donnay also makes a peated variant. Again, the distillery’s ability to mix the heavy (in this case smoke) with the lifted is demonstrated. Think sage and rosemary, mixed with nuts and a really salty tingle that brings to mind eating samphire while the smoke wreathes the palate. Make no mistake, this is one important new whisky. £60 
      		
 
			
 
Each cask of this nicely packaged malt is selected by the distiller, and so there is considerable variation between batches. This one is a step up from last year's releases. It's slightly weaker, but the nose has firmed up into a delightful mix of fresh juicy grape and a spicy dustiness. Tastewise this takes an amazing journey from plummy, sweet fruit up front to a slow dominance of dry sherry at the end. The finish is longer than before. Excellent. 
-> On page 43 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
An 8 year old wheated bourbon, finished 27 months in Frapin cognac casks. A dark, opulent nose: cocoa, crushed sweet cherry, and vanilla custard, laced with cinnamon and fired with the alcohol heat. My, my…it’s even enjoyable at full proof, and delivers the sweet promise on a solid bed of oak and heat. Heaven Hill’s getting good at these finishes. Expensive, but impressive. 
      		
 
			
 
Sticky short ribs from the 
, black pepper, allspice, and a little leather. This is a richly savory whisky with a substantial mouthfeel that’s never chewy. It was matured for 4 years in bourbon wood, then finished in 
 sherry casks, creating a palate of figs, mixed peel, dried chili flakes, mocha, and whole black peppercorns. Perfectly weighted, right down to the 
 finish with whole wheat digestive biscuits. Bold, audacious, and voluptuous.
      		
 
			
 
Winemakers have long known that toasted oak is very spicy. Today’s whisky makers are slowly catching on. Cinnamon hearts and hot peppermint add zing to a rich and creamy mouthfeel. Although the whisky is not overly sweet, it has a candied feel. Cloves and hot pepper round out the spices while vanilla and butterscotch lend smoothness as they keep earthy, flinty rye notes under control. Essences of cedar cigar box and black, withered figs contribute additional complexity. C$50
      		
 
			
 
Many distilleries have released bourbon finished in a second barrel, but it’s Prichard’s who was savvy enough to copyright the term “double barreled.”  As you’d expect, the nose is big oak, blending darker, more seasoned oak with lighter, new oak. The palate is unexpectedly balanced, with lush, sweet caramel in perfect sync with spicy oak, black pepper, clove, and cinnamon. That wonderful balance follows through to a medium finish that doesn’t leave you feeling like you’ve been chewing on a barrel.
      		
 
			
 
After last year's pot still triple whammy from Irish Distillers, we couldn't expect any more, could we? Could we? Step forward Yellow Spot, which seems to hold the view that if you can't beat 'em, don't get in the ring; go and pick a fight somewhere else. The pot still green apple and nutmeg notes are there on the nose and palate, but the nose also has vanilla and marzipan. On the palate the whiskey trips off to Speyside with sweetness, citrus zest, and pepper. Another game changer. €65
      		
 
			
 
This is what the standard Bushmills Malt 10 year old should taste like. A classic Irish whiskey nose. Deliciously sweet creamy notes of vanilla, marshmallow, honey, powdered sugar, and polished oak. Faint tropical fruit notes emerge from time to time. Very clean on the palate, with a dry, bourbon-like finish. Those extra few years in wood, along with being non-chill-filtered, add richness, depth, and complexity.
      		
 
			
 
A few years ago, Alberta’s Highwood distillers purchased all the remaining stock from Potter’s whisky brokerage just over the Rocky Mountains in Kelowna. With it, Highwood skillfully created a sumptuous, limited-edition bottling that is as sweet, smooth, and creamy as French vanilla ice cream, and richer in fresh clean wood than a carpentry shop. Dried cloves and red cedar balance real maple syrup and butterscotch which, in turn, dissolve into sweet white grapefruit. (Alberta only) C$52
      		
 
			
 
Tempting vanilla custard with swirls of orange marmalade and just-burnt toffee. Icing sugar, red cedar, and oak with pithy tannins and sizzling spices: pepper, hot cinnamon, and ginger. Then a fruitiness unfolds into crisp Granny Smith apples and chewy jujubes. Gradually, the layers peel back, revealing delicate hints of buttered popcorn, mealy marzipan, candy cane, and burley tobacco. The subtle earthiness of cooked corncobs complements sour fruits and sweet spices. Huge, complex, and beautifully balanced. 
C$50
      		
 
			
 
Another hard to get Indian whisky, but further proof that the category isn't a one-trick pony. This single cask release is the second from the John Distilleries and a significant step upward. An altogether more complex whisky with an earthy, prickly peat at one level, and a rich pureed pear heart with orange fruit and berries. The combination is quite gorgeous and with a little water you get whisky's answer to a summertime flower show. Impressive stuff. £60
      		
 
			
 
Tucked away in the small Alberta town of High River, Highwood distillers has made large volumes of Canadian whisky and dozens of other distilled beverages since 1974. Undaunted by recent flooding and with more than three decades of aging whisky on hand, the owners recently decided to emphasize premium whiskies. Ninety, the latest of these, is simply gorgeous. Crispy clean oak, dark fruit, butterscotch,
corncobs, and nutmeg precede candy cane, sour fruits, cinnamon, ginger, and citrus pith.
C$48
-> On page 44 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Here we see a significant step-change from the progression of 13 to 19 
. Now, there is added spice, ripe fresh cooked and dried fruits, and a touch of the peat smoke that used to be lightly added. With water, a mix of maple syrup and waxiness comes through. Complex and deep. The palate remains thick and silky, with melted white chocolate before lilies make an appearance alongside baked pineapple. Structured, layered, long, and elegant. £337
      		
 
			
 
Beautifully boxed for gift giving, a quality that carries over into the whiskey itself. Fresh-cut red cedar unfolds into hard candy, green apples, nail polish, rye bread, and ripe black cherries on the nose. Vague cedar on the palate becomes fruity and floral, then hot and spicy. Distant licorice root is restrained by German rye bread. Earthy but not dusty, with a sweet, hot, effervescent spiciness. Fades in a long, tingling finish. Complex and expressive: rich yet ethereal.
      		
 
			
 
Roll out the red carpet, because Green Spot is coming to town. Baked apple, spiced sultanas, lush green lawns, and ripe green fruits greet the nose. It’s oily, smothering, and luxuriantly juicy, with a depth of character that tips over the back of the tongue like nectar. That mélange of light vanilla, butterscotch, and creamy rice pudding sprinkled with nutmeg is heavenly. If this doesn’t persuade you to fall in love with Irish pot still whiskey, then nothing will.
      		
 
			
 
My, my, hey, hey. Freshly-laid asphalt and a swarm of peat buzzes up the nose. Heavy oilskins, stout wellingtons, and bladderwrack entangled in lobster pots. There is charming sweetness; a pussycat compared to the tiger of a nose. A thick, teeth-coating, warming glow emanates from deep at the back of the palate, with some roasted orange and dark chocolate. Superb balance between the peat and the sweetness. A triumph. It’s better to burn out than to fade away. €48
      		
 
			
 
It’s like Mom’s apple pie in a glass. This whiskey was distilled at Cooley and spent 14 years in bourbon, then 2 years extra maturation in an 80 year old 
 sherry cask from Bodegas Emilio Hidalgo. Brown sugar, baked apples, warmed almonds, chocolate jimmies, nutmeg, vanilla, and cardamom. Sherry flavors caress, with apple, spun sugar, candied peel, sultanas, stone fruits, and the fruitiness of Scharffen Berger bars. Gracefully wanes, meditating on the red and black fruits. (711 bottles) €250
      		
 
			
 
Similar to the standard Forty Creek Barrel Select, whiskymaker John Hall produces three different whiskies (rye, corn, and malted barley), ages them separately, and then marries them for a period before bottling. Unlike the Barrel Select, with Double Barrel Reserve, the resultant whisky is married in first-fill bourbon barrels rather than sherry casks. The result is a rich vanilla creaminess that coats the palate. Mixed in, you’ll find coconut, marshmallow, citrus, and pineapple, with emerging toasted pecan, dried spice, and dusty corn on the finish. Quite soothing and dangerously drinkable. My favorite so far from the various Forty Creek releases.

      		
 
			
 
Opinion is seriously divided on whether this or an earlier Port Wood edition is the best thing ever to come from John K. Hall’s Forty Creek distillery in Grimsby, Ontario. A winemaker, Hall used his own port barrels to finish a mature blend of barley, corn, and rye whiskies. Stewed prunes, butterscotch, and licorice rule the nose, while the palate broadens into savory herbs, spiced fruit, sweet pipe tobacco, and hints of, yes, gunpowder. C$70
      		
 
			
 
(Previously reviewed in Vol. 15, No. 3.) Similar to the other two rye whiskeys reviewed above, with less heat on the finish and slightly more minty spice notes. 

      		
 
			
 
One of the biggest American whiskeys I’ve tasted. We’re talking heavyweight class here. Notes of thick, chewy toffee and maple syrup are balanced nicely by firm, spicy rye notes, candied fruit, faint dusty corn, and polished oak. The bold spice notes of the rye (and oak) emerge again on the finish. Not as crisp and clean as the Sazerac Rye 18 year old (our Whiskey of the Year for 2005), but it makes up a lot of ground in its lush, decadent, mouth-coating richness. This is a dark, decadent whiskey. My take on the rye whiskey market is that these older expressions are becoming increasingly scarce and more expensive. (No one could have predicted such a demand, or even a category, two decades ago.) If you are a rye whiskey advocate, buy the good ones at the best price you can get. 

      		
 
			
 
Amber gold color. Rich, malty aroma with interwoven notes of fruit and oak. Floral note and just the wisp of smoke add complexity. Similar flavors-big and rich-with a long satisfying dryish finish. 

-> On page 45 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
One of Cooley’s finest efforts. Moderate doses of kiln smoke, dried turf, and kippers, tamed by vanilla cream, barley, and a buttery, olive oil texture. Subtle spices dance on the palate. Lingering smoky, white pepper finish. Islay meets Ireland. 

      		
 
			
 
Bright sparks, these Jameson guys. This takes all the worldwide quality and balance of the standard bottle and adds a large dollop of pot still whiskey, providing plummy, rich fruits to the mix. They may have also upped the effects of oak, too, so there's an extra depth to the whiskey. Fans of the brand will love it, and pot still whiskey fans will appreciate an affordable full-flavored blend. (Value Pick)
      		
 
			
 
The latest limited release from this brand. This whiskey spent most of its life aging in a bourbon barrel and then spent 9 months in sherry casks. (“Twin wood” is synonymous with “finishing.”) This one’s triple distilled (think Bushmills distillery) and is the first Knappogue Castle to be aged in two types of wood. It’s a very nice whiskey, with an array of bright fruit lying on a bed of creamy vanilla, toasted nuts, marshmallow, marzipan, and powdered cocoa. Excluding the original 1951 Knappogue Castle release (from the long gone B. Daly distillery), this is my favorite of the “modern day” Knappogue Castle whiskeys. 
      		
 
			
 
Not Compass Box at the very top of its game, but pretty damn good nevertheless. This is a mix of malts from different distilleries and it has the company's distinctive DNA all over it, combining siege cannon-strength peated malt with rich, fruity, sherried whisky. It's clumsier than the wonderful Flaming Heart but in the same ballpark, and I have to declare an interest — I adore this combination when it's delivered right. £180 
      		
 
			
 
The smoking wicks of church candles, smoked meat, coastal notes, cumin, coriander seed, and herbal elements. A sophisticated palate of unsweetened fruit. Peaches, citrus, and pineapple, with a waxy presence building later on, settles to a dry finish of herbs and beeswax. We can easily overlook the narcissism of making tributes to your own past bottlings as John Glaser turns whisky resurrectionist in homage to Eleuthera. Layered, complex, thought provoking, and finely tuned for the connoisseur.
      		
 
			
 
A special bottling in recognition of Chicago's outstanding alternative rock venue Delilah's, and like that venue this is full of character, color, grit, and determination. It's sweet but never cloying, soft and honeyed but gutsy, and there are peppermint, licorice, and fresh hay notes in the mix, too. It's spent time in bourbon wood and that shows. A departure for Compass Box, but a healthy one.
      		
 
			
 
An older, more exotic expression of Hedonism, consisting of 42 year old Invergordon and 29 year old Cameron Bridge grain whiskies. Straw gold color. This is richer and cleaner than most other grain whisky offerings, which are often too thin and overweight with dry oak. Like many older grain whiskies, creamy vanilla, coconut custard, and a variety of tropical fruits abound. Additional notes of toasted marshmallow, caramelized apricot, golden raisin, and a gentle dried spice finish add complexity. Surely one of the better examples of this rather eccentric category.

      		
 
			
 
So how brave can you be? Would you take one of the world's most iconic blends and risk messing with it? If you've got a whisky maker as good as Jim Beveridge, then why not? This picks up from the regular JW Black and its signature Caol Ila smoke and peat heart and then adds to it, doing exactly what it says on the tin. But the clever part of this is upping the apple, orange, and fruit content too. Great. 
      		
 
			
 
Not exactly a new whisky for the Jubilee, just a new pack, but it’s a good enough excuse to have a look at this top-end blend. Great maturity with masses of orchard fruits and a hint of passion fruit as well. The oak is rounded and supple while with water a banana note is released. Thick and chewy, with more grip than suggested on the nose and a little nut on the finish. Great blending. 
      		
 
			
 
Amber gold color. Aromas of delicate fruit, coconut, vanilla and toffee, with delicate background oak notes. The flavor delivers what the aroma promises. It is nicely balanced, with a lingering dryish finish. 

-> On page 46 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Very graceful, with a nice balance of youth and maturity. Gently sweet notes of toffee, fig, nougat, and maple syrup, spiked with cinnamon and vanilla. Dark berried fruit and a hint of coconut round out the palate. Perilously more-ish bourbon with a very easy-going demeanor. (A Park Avenue Liquor exclusive.)
      		
 
			
 
Light bronze color. Thick, mature aromas, with notes of subtle spice (vanilla, mint), toffee, light molasses and leather. Adding a little water revealing notes of teaberry, anise, and dark candied fruit. Pleasantly sweet at first in flavor, with notes of brown sugar and spice (vanilla, mint), becoming dry with enveloping flavors of oak and leather. With a little water, more subtle flavors are revealed, including toffee, dark fruit, and anise. The whisky finishes long and dry with significant depth. 

   Style: Bourbon. Price: under $20. Availability: Kentucky only. 

   This is a big exciting bourbon, full of character from the distillery previously known as Ancient Age. The price is right too-if you can find the whiskey to buy it.
      		
 
			
 
Richly flavored and surprisingly sweet on the nose and front of the palate. A tactile whiskey: creamy, yet becoming resinous toward the finish. Notes of vanilla saltwater taffy, roasted nuts, tobacco, and molasses. An intriguing whiskey, and my favorite of the three.
      		
 
			
 
Each of these three bourbons was distilled and bottled at the same time, and aged in the same warehouse for 12 years and 3 months. The main variable was the floor they were aged on. In theory, the higher up in the warehouse, the greater the temperature variation, and the more wood influence. Does the experiment support this general concept? Yes, with the sweet spot being the middle floor.

Similar sweet notes as its sibling aged in floor #1 (caramel, honey, ripe fruit), but with an additional layer of dried spice (cinnamon, vanilla, clove) to accompany it. It has all the components of a fine bourbon, and it’s also nicely balanced, with good oak grip on the finish. The best of the three. Price is per 375 ml
      		
 
			
 
Buffalo Trace distilled a wheated bourbon and aged barrels from the same distillation date on three different floors (1, 5 and 9) for 12 ½ years to see what the differences would be. This is similar to an experiment they conducted last year using a rye mashbill bourbon. As you will see, the higher the floor, the more intense the flavors, and the greater the wood influence.

Gentle and easygoing. Creamy texture, with layered sweet notes of caramel, vanilla, marzipan, and crème brûlée. Soft background spice lingers on a delicate, soothing finish. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
A remarkably balanced bourbon. Evolving notes of maple, vanilla, mint, dried fruit, coconut, and polished oak with a hint of leather on the finish. Very clean and drinkable too-especially for a 13 year old bourbon. Only 726 bottles were produced, but it’s worth tracking down one of the remaining bottles. 

      		
 
			
 
Well matured, but still with a spicy rye mean streak. There’s a lush sweetness that tames both the resinous oak and the bold rye spice…it’s a harmonious balance between the three, actually. Warming cinnamon and cool mint meld with sweet corn, 
, honey-kissed citrus, pecan pie, and cocoa powder, leading to a long, dry, spicy, leather-tinged finish. Bottled to celebrate the 15
 Anniversary of Delilah’s bar in Chicago. A worthy effort!
      		
 
			
 
One of the leading bourbon-specialty bars in the U.S., located in Chicago, finally has its own single barrel bourbon. The flavors are nicely balanced, and there’s a soothing, creamy texture throughout the palate. Sweet notes of coconut cream, vanilla fudge, and honeycomb are enhanced by a complex array of more delicate notes of spearmint, green tea, golden raisin, dusty corn, cocoa, and oak resin. This time, “13” is a lucky number. 

      		
 
			
 
A limited run to commemorate Elmer’s birthday. An elegant, complex whiskey. The flavors are nice and tight. Bright fruit (dried citrus, tangerine, nectarine, hint of pineapple), brittle mint, vanilla, and gin botanicals, soothed by nougat and soft caramel, with subtle -- yet lingering -- dark chocolate, espresso, and dried tobacco on the finish. Great drinkability too!
      		
 
			
 
An elegant bourbon, and very drinkable too! Its flavors are clean and tight, with bright fruit (nectarine, tangerine,
pineapple), soft coconut, honeyed vanilla, cotton candy, and subtle gin botanicals. Polished leather and a hint of dark chocolate on the finish. Great anytime. 
-> On page 47 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
A bright and lively bourbon. Nicely balanced, too, with notes of caramel custard, red licorice, orange marmalade, golden raisin, and coconut cream, underpinned by crisp rye and tantalizing cinnamon. A gently sweetish whiskey -- not cloying in any way. In fact, it’s very drinkable. And it’s a whiskey that demonstrates great harmony between youth and maturity.
      		
 
			
 
Deeper and darker than some Four Roses, but with plenty of bright, lush sweetness. Notes of toffee, honey-drenched nuts, and ripe summer fruit. Nicely spiced, with cinnamon, nutmeg, and a dusting of mocha. I just love the honey influence. A well-balanced whiskey, with all the flavors taking turns to shine. Great integration of flavors, too! One of my favorite Four Roses single barrel bourbons, which will grow on you with every sip.
      		
 
			
 
Very floral and fragrant. Gently sweet, too: apple tart laced with cinnamon, pancakes drizzled with maple syrup.  Well-defined oak and crisp, dry spice (cinnamon, anise, cocoa, nutmeg) balance the sweetness. An interesting whiskey: big in some ways, yet elegant in others
      		
 
			
 
Stagg is so smooth, it’s quite drinkable at higher proofs. On the other hand, when you bring it down to the strength that you would normally drink your whiskey, it’s almost too easygoing (I made the same comment about last year’s William Larue Weller bottling). The main theme to this whiskey is lush toffee sweetness and, like last year’s expression, some vanilla fudge, nougat, and molasses. Underlying notes of dates, tobacco, dark berried fruit, spearmint, and a hit of coffee round out the palate. Given the higher strength, it’s a true value bourbon -- almost like getting two bottles in one. A very nice whiskey but, when brought down to comparable strength, the Eagle Rare 17 has more complexity.
      		
 
			
 
Amber, with shades of ruby and gold. Aromas of complex ripe fruit (golden raisins, marmalade, cherries, apples), toffee, treacle, and hint of mint. Full, rich texture and body-almost chewy. Flavors of lush fruit drenched with honey and caramel. Long, warming, slightly spicy finish. Style: single malt Scotch whisky, Price: approx. $60. Available nationwide.

I'm so happy to see this fine whisky finally imported to the U.S. after being available in its homeland now for about two years. The name a'bunadh literally means "the origin" in Gaelic, and it produced in the style of Aberlour back in the late 1800s-at the natural strength and not chill filtered. It certainly is an exciting whisky, produced in small batches (mine was Batch #6) from select oloroso sherry casks. I've noticed a slight variation in color from one batch to the next, largely due to the types of sherry casks selected.
      		
 
			
 
More subtle and complex than the new 12 year old, and not as sweet. Creamy in texture and floral on the nose, with dried vanilla, gentle spice, nectarine, kiwi, plum, and lemon gum drops. Soft, elegant finish with a hint of mint. Great balance of a variety of flavors and lots of finesse. A well-crafted whisky!

      		
 
			
 
Amber, with shades of ruby. Notes of complex honey-drenched fruit (sultana, marmalade, peaches, apples), toffee, treacle, and hint of mint. Full, rich texture and lush body. Long, warming, moderately spicy finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Pale white wine color. Smoky, youthful aroma. There’s no surprises here-it definitely smells like a young Ardbeg. Big beautiful explosion of smoky, tarry flavors that evolve and seem to linger on the palate indefinitely.
   Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: low $60s. Available nationwide. 

   This is the first Ardbeg release I've tasted since the distillery's long shut down in the 1980s. After the shut down, they discontinued their floor maltings, so I was concerned that it might not taste like the Ardbeg of old. Ardbeg fans can let out a big sigh of relief. This one is big and gutsy-just the way we like it. My only criticism of this particular release is that it could have used about one or two more years in oak to tame some of the spirity nature of the whisky. Otherwise, this is wonderful stuff!
      		
 
			
 
Very dynamic, complex, and powerful. Here’s what I’m picking up, in somewhat descending order in taste profile: leafy smoke, coal tar, mocha fudge with dark chocolate chips, smoked olive, peppered seaweed salad, fruit (lemon, lime), genever, brine-tinged grass, and (with some coaxing) floral notes (violet?). Compared to last year’s debut release of Supernova, this one is certainly comparable, but I feel it’s a tad richer, with more leafy smoke and ripe barley. It also seems a bit more polished, less aggressive. I like it a little more than its predecessor (which I rated an 89).
      		
 
			
 
The oldest Ardmore I have tasted. Smartly bottled at cask strength and not chill-filtered. (The entry level Ardmore “Traditional” is at the opposite end of the age spectrum, tasting quite youthful.) My initial concern with this 30 year old was: would the wood dominate the lovely floral, smoky notes I enjoy so much with Ardmore? The wood is certainly present, but the smoke still comes through. There’s a gently layered sweetness that complements the smoke (toffee, deep caramel, subtle honey), licorice root, bourbon barrel char, coffee grounds, and high cocoa chocolate, with subtle dried citrus and a suggestion of floral soap. Dry finish, with more bourbon barrel char and licorice root. Considering that Ardmore has historically been a blending malt, most of the stocks right now are much younger. This is a rare treat. It’s a wee bit thin in body and a little on the dry side from 30 years on wood for me to rate it in the mid 90s, but it’s still a very enjoyable whisky.
-> On page 48 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This is not a single-cask bottling like other recent wine-finished releases, but the casks they selected are very good ones. Lovely antique amber color. The Madeira dovetails beautifully with the malt and oak, and it has matured nicely for a whisky less than ten years old. Lush notes of orange marmalade, raspberry tart, and 
, all wrapped up in rich toffee and a dusting of nutmeg, cinnamon, and cocoa. A dry, resinous, spicy, tactile finish adds balance, complexity, and additional dimension. Smartly bottled at a higher strength. Some of these wine-finished Arran whiskies are impressive. This is one of them.
      		
 
			
 
Aged in first and (mostly) second fill sherry casks. The sherry is kept in balance and does not mask Auchentoshan’s subtle beauty. The classic Auchentoshan creamy, grassy, freshness abounds, complemented by honey-soaked almonds, cereal grain, and an array of bright fruit (citrus, sultana, mandarin). Not as polished as the Auchentoshan 21 year old, but quite entertaining. (420 bottles for the U.S.) 

      		
 
			
 
Amber color, with gold hues. Soft, subtly seductive aromas of creamy vanilla, crème brulee, tropical fruit, oak, and a hint of mint. Light to medium in body-silky in texture at first, then becoming and firm. On the palate, the whisky starts out gently sweet, with creamy vanilla and honeyed malt. Subtle tropical fruit notes arrive mid palate. The whisky then begins to dry out fairly rapidly (this is a 36 year old Lowland after all), as dry resinous notes of vanilla, mint, and herbs reveal themselves. The whisky finishes dry, with notes of soft leather.

   Style: Lowland single malt Scotch whisky. Price: $120. Available exclusively at Sam's Wines & Spirits. 

   The way the owners of Auchentoshan and Glen Garioch are handling vintage bottlings now is that specialty retailer orders an entire cask and sells it exclusively. This one is a Sam's exclusive. It's older than the previous, widely distributed 1966 bottling and less expensive too! You wouldn't expect a triple distilled Lowland whisky to age so gracefully. Auchentoshan is an exception to the rule. It has acquired the depth and maturity from extensive aging, yet it still manages to maintain its distillery character and Lowland gentility. Only on the dry finish does it really show its age. But that's a small price to pay for an otherwise very good single cask whisky at a very reasonable price for 36 years old.
      		
 
			
 
A special Balvenie to honor Master Distiller David Stewart’s 30 years working at the distillery. This is a big and brooding dram. The aroma suggests it is aged in both bourbon and sherry oak. It’s complex and richly flavored (sweeter up front and increasingly dry towards its finish), with notes of honey, candied fruit, thick cut marmalade, vanilla, almonds, and prominent spicy oak notes. I’m picking up plenty of sherry in this new expression, which I like. It finishes firmly dry, with notes of spice and tannin. While I enjoy this whisky a great deal, you might want to seek out the Balvenie 25 year old (which I rated a 93) while the odd bottle is still available. It is slightly more rounded on the palate, and less than half the cost. 

      		
 
			
 
A harmonious marriage of fruit and spice. More balanced than last year’s sweet Rum Cask release. In fact, this is one of the most deftly-balanced whiskies I’ve tasted this year. Bramble, ripe nectarine, caramel apple, honeyed vanilla, and golden raisin, spiced with cinnamon and nutmeg. Soft (for Balvenie), lingering, warm, dried spice finish. 

      		
 
			
 
So soon? This latest release of what is becoming a legendary series mixes nine casks—four butts, five hoggies—from between 1966 and 1990. Hugely complex and obviously mature, it is one to sit and smell forever. Marzipan, mocha, pain au chocolat, manuka honey; every sniff reveals another aroma. It opens into cigar, sandalwood, citrus, and ripe black fruits. The palate is equally layered and expansive. It takes water, but only a drop, for that density is all-important.
      		
 
			
 
This latest installment of the Tun 1401 series is a classic expression of old, mature Balvenie, where a waxiness akin to furniture polish slides into mead-like aromas; actually more like metheglin, as there’s an herbal, spiced element. Its textural richness means it is best with water on the side, allowing deep earthy, licorice, and cigar ash tones to
develop, along with just the lightest squeeze of tannin. 
      		
 
			
 
Great balance between vibrant oak spice and lush, sherried fruit. Interwoven notes of honeyed malt, vanilla, citrus fruit, milk chocolate, and lingering peat add complexity. Quite large for a BenRiach and very fresh for its age. This whisky takes BenRiach to a higher level. 

      		
 
			
 
Beautifully clean and polished on the palate -- it still allows BenRiach’s other flavors to shine through. Ripe, complex tropical fruit notes meld with delicate honey and suggestions of shortbread cookies and toasted coconut. Teasing peat and smoke surfaces from time to time. This whisky is a lot of fun to drink. (800 bottles total; 120 for the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
No hiding that this is one of BenRiach’s peated variants, with smoke coming at you like an out of control garden bonfire, but the inherent sweetness of the distillery character adds a counterpoint: cinnamon-dusted apples baking in the fire, before angelica and cannabis (someone tells me) come through. The interplay between fruits and grassy smoke continues on the palate alongside toffee, nougat, peach syrup, and salty licorice before the smoke returns. A belter. And a great price.
-> On page 49 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
We had some new Benromachs from Gordon & MacPhail last issue that illustrated what the firm has been up to since it purchased the site in 1992. This release comes from its previous incarnation as part of DCL. The elegant, mature nose shows an ‘Old Speyside’ light smokiness alongside barley, cacao, cigar humidor, and potpourri. The palate is gentle and unctuous with some sherried touches, while the smoke reruns on the very end. £150 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
A lovely example of a mature, sherried Bowmore. Its rich flavors evolve on the palate and are nicely balanced. Lush fruit, juicy oak, damp peat, and kiln smoke are peppered with cinnamon, raisins, dates, and cocoa. Warming, soothing finish. Not quite Black Bowmore, but a delicious whisky nonetheless. 

      		
 
			
 
Darkest now has an age statement of 15 years old. This new release is an improvement from the original Darkest, both of which are succulently sherried. It is fuller in flavor and more visceral, in both the nose and palate. These differences are subtle, but positive. Notes of lush fruit, raisin, pot-still rum, and Heath bars. Citrus and wood spices emerge, along with burning peat embers that linger on the finish. Nicely done. 

      		
 
			
 
The fruit (orange marmalade, tangerine, fresh pineapple) is nearly as dominant as the leafy smoke. Sweet notes of nutty caramel, honeyed barley, toffee, and nougat round out the palate. Ginger, cinnamon, telicherry pepper, tobacco, and ash play a supporting role. Lingering fruity, smoky finish. For those who like sherried Islay whiskies.
      		
 
			
 
There’s a fascinating journey taking place here. The nose takes you indoors; caramelized tropical fruits, coffee cake, a spent fire in the grate, and just the merest whiff of the waves hitting the beach. The palate, however, places you squarely aboard a yacht under sail: salt spray, deck and engine oil, worn leather upholstery. It seems way more mature than 12 years. The intensity is lost with water, but you gain more smoke. A great bottling.  £59
      		
 
			
 
Matured in first-fill sherry casks, here we have Bowmore at its ballsiest, with massively bold notes of prune, dried fig, salted treacle, toffee, shoe leather, rose petal, and savory maritime edges that glance toward Marmite, all of which are infiltrated by clouds of smoke. The palate has retained sweetness, mixing black cherry, pipe tobacco, and cloves. Powerful and seriously impressive with fantastic balance that retains Bowmore identity, adds richness, ups the peatiness, and leaves you under Satan’s spell.
      		
 
			
 
This Bowmore has been finished in sherry casks, but without allowing the exuberance of the cask to overwhelm the dram. Instead, there’s concentrated stone fruits, lifted smoke, dried mint, dark chocolate, bitter orange peels, and some smoke. There’s a teasing hint on the tongue of tropical fruits, then a deepening mix of plump dried figs and sultana. Long, layered, with the smoke seamlessly involved, adding accents rather than fogging up proceedings. 
£70
      		
 
			
 
The distillery closed in 1983, and was replaced by the Clynelish distillery across the street. Classic Brora. Fresh, and exuberant for a 25 year old whisky. Briny, with citrus zest, fruit gum drops, dynamic spices, and a hint of seaweed and smoke. Appetizing finish. All the flavors are well-integrated, and the whisky is very clean. If you don’t have a Brora yet, get this one before it’s gone. 

      		
 
			
 
Finished in Chateau d’Yquem casks, and it shows. There’s a creamy, honeyed sweetness and viscosity to this whisky that is very soothing. Bruichladdich’s brisk sea character cuts through the lightly syrup-like thickness and keeps the whisky fresh and lively, while notes of golden raisin, peaches, lemon gum drops, vanilla, and coconut add complexity. Satisfying salty/sweet finish. 

      		
 
			
 
A marriage of Bruichladdich with three different peating levels. Devotees of young, smoky Islay whiskies will enjoy this one. It is youthful and explosive, with earthy peat smoke, fish nets, brine, and kiln ash. All this is tamed beautifully by notes of vanilla wafer, seductive malt, marshmallow, spiced peaches, and pear. 

-> On page 50 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This one is my favorite of the four distillery-bottled Bruichladdich whiskies reviewed here. It still quite lively and nicely balanced for such a mature whisky (and reminiscent of the previous 1970 vintage in this respect), with some floral notes and brine emerging from its fruity, vanilla, truffle, nougat foundation. Still, it maintains an air of lightness and freshness throughout, with a pleasingly dry, subtly spicy finish that lingers. 

      		
 
			
 
An unusual, but very fine, Bruichladdich, with sweet, chewy toffee notes I often associate with Speyside whiskies, not Islay (although I have tasted a few older Bunnahabhain whiskies that were like this). Layers of marzipan and chocolate fudge also emerge, and I even pick up some apple and black cherry fruit in the background. Bruichladdich's "sea breeze" freshness rises through the chewy sweetness and provides balance and complexity.
      		
 
			
 
A single cask from the distillery’s peated “Port Charlotte” line of whiskies. Well behaved for such youth. Nice honeyed malt and soft caramel base with good viscosity as a bed for tarry peat, licorice stick, freshly-ground pepper, and cocoa, along with a kiss of sauternes, delicate pit fruit, smoked seaweed, and a lingering coastal accent. Long, warming finish. (A Park Avenue Liquor exclusive.)
      		
 
			
 
The first 10 year old distilled by the current owners back in 2001. Lovely marriage of both bourbon and sherry casks, and quite fresh, with a maturity resembling a 12 year old, rather than 10. Smooth on the palate and very drinkable, with creamy vanilla, honeycomb, banana bread, bright lemon, melon (honeydew, cantaloupe), tangerine, candied ginger, and delicate brine. With all the Bruichladdich razzle-dazzle over the past decade, we can embrace this unpretentiously delicious Laddie with open arms. 
      		
 
			
 
Using barley grown on Rockside Farm, this is fresh, sweet (agave syrup), delicate, and lightly buttery, with touches of lily of the valley and lemon sponge cake mix. The cereal character is restrained, with a charred hint on the palate along with banana, mandarin, cassia, and pink marshmallows (untoasted). The Laddie’s floral notes emerge late, and the whiff of white pepper on the end is all there is to remind you of its youth. A classy young whisky. £45
      		
 
			
 
Robust Port Charlotte character, with salami and 
 to the fore. Somewhat like eating a chorizo and roasted red pepper sandwich on the beach on a summer’s day, but it retains the sweet freshness of the distillery character. With water, the lovely smell of cow’s breath. There’s dry smoke to start with on the palate, becoming sweet (flash-fried scallop) with sugared almond on the finish. For me, PC comes fully of age here. £55
      		
 
			
 
Older expressions of this unpeated Islay dram are often quite delicious, but they aren't easy to come by. The best ones, like this one, take the sweetish toffee/nutty foundation of younger expressions and add layers of depth and complexity. This whisky just continues to evolve on the palate. The entrance is creamy in texture with layers of sweetness (caramel, vanilla fudge, toffee), becoming nutty and marzipan-like with subtle background fruit. The finish is long and pleasingly dry, with a hint of salt. Very entertaining and satisfying.
      		
 
			
 
Nougat and dates to the fore, then becoming increasingly nutty with suggestions of Demerara rum and cinnamon and underlying polished leather. Lovely dried spice notes and an appetizing salty tang teases the palate on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Very fragrant on the nose, and thick on the palate. The flavors are chock full of thick chewy toffee, chocolate fudge, roasted nuts, burnt raisin, black currant, and spiced oak. There’s a hint of salt and Earl Grey tea on the finish. Very dynamic. 

      		
 
			
 
Often overshadowed by other noisier neighbors, it is time to reconsider Caol Ila—and this is a fine place to start. Coming from a refill cask it has a nose of sweet crab, ham with cider glaze, and teasing maritime smoke. The palate mixes salt taffy with top-end peppery olive oil, allowing the flavors to cover the palate while the smoke rumbles along constantly before a salt-laden finish. Superlative balance. Find one of those 620 bottles! £85	
-> On page 51 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
More smoke than is common from this distillery and age. The aromas are food-related: initially roast ham with caramelized sugars, then a clambake, then oven-roasted lobster. With water, a distinct whiff of the goat shed (nice, by the way). The palate is refined and mature, but with fresh fruits retained, with oak and smoke beautifully integrated. A mature Caol Ila in similar vein to the excellent (and significantly more keenly priced) 25 year old. (7,638 bottles)
      		
 
			
 
Straw color. Fresh, appetizing aroma. Light-medium body. Nicely balanced flavors. Both the aroma and palate express notes of spices (Dijon mustard), brine, exotic peppers, caramel, and fruit. Lingering finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Very dry, fragrant and spicy. Medium bodied, but firm. Initial, flirtatious notes of honey, creamy caramel and oatcakes quickly become dry and arid, with a foundation of leather and oak shavings. The whisky is peppered throughout with notes of anise, coffee, dried herbs and undertones of Madeira. Very forward and bullishly dry for its age, and more intense than the standard Cragganmore bottling. It’s rare for a whisky this young to be so complex. 

      		
 
			
 
Independent bottlings of Cragganmore are hard to come by, and this one is a beauty. Cragganmore is not rich, heavy, or sweet like many Speyside whiskies. This one is medium-bodied, yet firm. It is clean on the palate throughout (with a brief honeyed vanilla note before becoming dry), and it is loaded with spice and dried fruits that continue to evolve. Long, lingering, finish. The decision to forego chill-filtering certainly reveals more of this whisky’s subtle, yet persistent, complexity. 

      		
 
			
 
This expression of The Dalmore Constellation spent its entire 33 years of maturation in an ex-bourbon cask, with no additional finishing. The result is a nose of ripe peaches and pears, honey, and vanilla. Full-bodied, rich, sweet, elegant, yet substantial on the palate, with pineapples and fudge. Oak and aniseed slowly build, but the wood is held at bay. Long and warming in the finish, with soft spices. Barely drying. Cask number 594; 199 bottles. 
      		
 
			
 
The Dalmore spirit that comprises Ceti comes from a mix of bourbon and sherry casks, with bourbon wood predominating. 23 years of maturation in American oak were followed by seven years in 30 year old Gonzalez Byass Matusalem oloroso sherry butts. The result is a nose of old leather, hessian, sandalwood, vanilla, plain chocolate, and ripe Jaffa oranges. Very full-bodied, with burnt orange, pineapple, and sticky toffee, while the finish offers ginger, orange wine gums, and old oak. 1,000 bottles. £1,250
      		
 
			
 
Dalmore 25 year old comprises spirit matured initially in American oak casks, some of which is then transferred into first-fill bourbon barrels, while the remainder goes into Palomino 
 sherry butts. The two batches are then reunited in bourbon barrels before a final finishing in tawny port pipes. Vanilla, figs, toffee, and ripe oranges on the festive nose, while the palate features more orange, peaches, milk chocolate, and sherry. The chocolate darkens in the lengthy finish, with ginger and licorice.
      		
 
			
 
There have been a lot of old, heavily sherried, independently bottled Glen Grant whiskies on the market over the past several years. This one appears to be from a refill sherry cask, as its influence is more subtle. It has aged well, showing no excessive oak, but plenty of fruit (summer fruits, dried citrus, stewed fruits, tangerine, golden raisin), balanced by polished oak, grape skin, and subtle dark chocolate. Distinctively pleasing. Don’t add too much water, though, as it breaks down. (A Kensington Wine Market exclusive.) $500 (CAD)
      		
 
			
 
This is quite different from the Adelphi Glen Grant bottling (below), being more cask-driven, but Glen Grant’s clean fruitiness remains, although transformed by age. Its apples are baked, with some added caramelized juices thrown in; we see apricot alongside dried lemon peel, and light, sweet spice. The waxiness here is akin to leather oil, while the oak has sufficient grip to give structure. In time, there are hints of the cellar — burlap and wet earth. Delicious, and best neat. £184
      		
 
			
 
Created by Dennis Malcolm to celebrate his half century at Glen Grant, this uses casks
from each of his five decades. Pale it may be, but this is no dainty little
thing. There’s lots of buttery oak before classic Glen Grant lift and energy
emerge: green apple, fruit blossom, William pear, and yellow fruits; lemon
butter icing and nettles with water. The palate is vibrant and energetic, but
holds to the middle of the tongue. A suitably celebratory dram.
Congratulations! 
-> On page 52 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
If every fan of sherried whisky has a favorite GlenDronach then this is a long way down the road to being mine. It has a dusty dried orange peel, powdery, and perfumey nose, a soft and sweet round palate with a dark chocolate, tangerine, and pink grapefruit heart, and a balanced and gentle finish. This was probably once a hollerin’ maned lion of a malt, but it’s grown old gracefully and it now purrs and growls beautifully. £80 
      		
 
			
 
Sherry butt once more, but this is much more relaxed in its attentions — think Montgomery Clift seducing Elizabeth Taylor rather than De Niro chatting up Liza Minelli. Sweetness is the key here, gentle and slightly caramelized, with touches of molasses-like concentration and even a whiff of the top of a crème brûlée. The palate surprises with its continued freshness; apple and the distillery’s distinctive earthy richness. Great balance.£382
      		
 
			
 
The youngest of this Family Cask selection shows Glenfarclas in a surprisingly citric light, with plenty of citrus peels — tangerine, marmalade, and orange syrup, as well as sultana, suede, wax polish (surprising in a youngish dram), and chocolate — a recurring theme here. It is almost as if all the more lifted elements in each of the previous casks have here united. Mature, but highly expressive, and a great starter.  £172
      		
 
			
 
Although the youngest of the range, this has still spent 24 years in a refill butt.  The nose is highly concentrated, with freshly-sharpened pencils and black cherry. There’s also some tobacco and then an earthy, armagnac-esque pruniness. Water brings out a resinous element, supple leather, and fruit syrups, allowing it to retain complexity. The driest of the range with the most obvious grip; for lovers of big, sherried, malts. £225
      		
 
			
 
This latest vintage release from Glen Garioch is a cask strength 25 year old. It follows on from previous ‘small-batch’ 1978, 1990, 1991, and 1994 vintages. Peaches and ginger on the nose, with fudge and a wisp of smoke. Mildly herbal. Full-bodied, rich, and sweet in the mouth. Fresh fruit and violet creams. Finally a slightly earthy, peaty note. The finish is long and gently smoky. Robust, yet refined.
      		
 
			
 
Quite fragrant, with a thick, oily texture. Sweet notes (vanilla, sticky toffee), ripe barley, earthy peat, licorice root, and a hint of melon and citrus. Very clean and characterful. A lot of fun to drink. Nicely done! I can’t imagine a 14 year old Glen Garioch tasting any better than this. (A Julio’s Liquor Exclusive) 
      		
 
			
 
A polished whisky, light-medium in body with well-rounded flavors. Fruity (ripe orange, lemon gumdrops, candy apple), with creamy vanilla and a honeyed, toasted malt foundation. Soft, gentle oak throughout. What a lovely, gentle-natured whisky, straight down the middle! Bonus points for versatility. 
      		
 
			
 
The initial release in Glenglassaugh’s new ‘The Chosen Few’ range has been picked by customer accounts manager Ronnie Routledge. It was distilled in 1976 and matured in an ex-sherry butt that yielded 654 bottles. Initially, an aroma of Black Twist tobacco and treacle, with sweeter and more floral notes following on. Significant honey influence. Mouth-coating, with sweet sherry and tropical fruits, plus developing honey and spice notes. Oak, toast, and dark chocolate in the lingering, lively finish. £300
      		
 
			
 
Glenglassaugh has altered its policy of offering single cask expressions of its 40 year old, and replaced these with a vatting of casks to provide an ongoing release program, offered at cask strength and without chill filtration. The nose is pleasingly complex, with ginger, honey, milk chocolate, icing sugar, sherry, plums, and new leather. Resinous on the palate, with pineapple and brittle toffee, then black coffee and aniseed. A spicy oakiness ultimately develops. Drying steadily in the finish, with licorice and oak tannins. £1,200
      		
 
			
 
Credit to Glengoyne for coming up with something different. There are just 100 bottles of this malt available this year, with a further 100 or so released each Christmas from the same cask each year until 2014, effectively offering malt enthusiasts the chance to plot a work in progress. Better still, this first effort is one of the best releases ever to come out of the distillery.
The name is spot on; it really is Christmas in a glass, with the almost feminine aromas of rosewater, flowers, candy stick, and fruit giving way to a huge sherry note on the palate. Dark chocolate, cherry, orange, and chili notes combine to offer up a bold and full malt. Some special bottlings from Glengoyne have been over-oaky or marred by sulfur, but not this one. This is clean, pure, and classy. Can’t wait to see where it goes next.

-> On page 53 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The latest addition to Glengoyne’s permanent range is a 25 year old, matured in European oak sherry casks and presented in non-chill filtered format. Syrup-like on the nose, very sweet, with milk chocolate, ginger, Jaffa oranges, and sticky toffee pudding. Smooth and sweet on the palate, with overt sherry, sultanas, and gentle spice. The finish is medium to long, with a hint of oak, old leather, and lingering cloves. Bold, yet elegant. £250
      		
 
			
 
A very clean whisky, with fragrant dried flowers, aromas of germinating barley, textured honey, vanilla waver, coconut cream and teasing fresh pineapple. Drying, delicately minty finish. For those who love the richly elegant, non-sherried style of older Glenlivet whiskies. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged exclusively in first-fill bourbon casks and bottled unfiltered and at natural cask strength. This takes the usually subtle Glenlivet and makes it more vibrant, amplifying its flavors while accentuating the bourbon oak. Tight notes of honeyed malt, vanilla bean, toasted oak, bright fruit, and nuts, are peppered with more subtle floral and spice notes. Dry, spicy finish. A Glenlivet with pizzazz.
      		
 
			
 
Antique amber color. This whisky maintains the elegance cherished by Glenlivet enthusiasts, but finishing the whisky in limousin oak produces a whisky of deeper wood notes, particularly wood spices (vanilla, sandalwood, perhaps even mint) and floral notes. It’s rich, complex, and dry-especially on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Younger bottlings of Glenlivet are often quite elegant and subtle. But such finesse isn’t always evident in older expressions, which often become dominated by sherry and oak. This one, at 35 years of age, demonstrates plenty of elegance and finesse. What impresses me most about this whisky is that you wouldn’t know it was 35 year old just by taste. It isn’t the least bit tired on the palate, and it is very clean, without the excessive woodiness often found in whiskies of this age. Plus, the balance of flavors is impeccable-vanilla, honeyed malt, peaches, pineapple, heather, and just a touch of oak. A very polished, refined whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
You would expect any 70 year old whisky to be crepuscular, dense, and wooded. Not here. The nose is amazingly fresh — distillery character fully intact — with layers of rancio and heavy florals. In time, there’s candle wax, vanilla, milk chocolate, and a touch of leather, even the whiff of a soft mink stole. Concentrated and complex. The palate is like an ancient vin santo with oxidized nuttiness, quince and medlar, and subtle peat. Hugely expressive on the palate, with a sweet finish. Truly remarkable. 
      		
 
			
 
A quintet of releases showing examples of The Glenlivet from five decades, issued to support The Glenlivet Generations 70 year old bottling. All are available individually or in a limited edition set (50 only) for £2,850; these bottlings are not currently available in the U.S.

A first-fill American oak hoggie was the receptacle for the representative from the 1960s. The cask has provided an extremely relaxed environment for maturation to take place, with a return of the pineapple (grilled on a barbecue this time), along with linden blossom, cream, green jasmine tea, and mint. The effect is like a grown up 1991. The maturity kicks in on the palate — thick and slow with some sandalwood alongside honeysuckle. Gentle and clean, and again not one to dilute. £750
      		
 
			
 
Waves of fruit (apple pie, orange marmalade, sultana, ripe pineapple), accented with notes of dark chocolate, roasted nuts, and spice (cinnamon, vanilla, ginger, evergreen), particularly on the finish. (In the past, I’ve thought that a couple of these limited edition Glemorangie wood finishes were a little overdone with the finishing, but not this one). 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Highland single malt scotch Color: Golden honey Aroma: Lush and mouthwatering. Notes of honey, peaches in syrup, golden raisins, coconut, vanilla, and background resinous oak. Palate: Creamy and velvety in texture. Honey and fruit up front, with some oak notes, wood resins and vanilla mid-palate, becoming sweet again with a soothing finish. 

      		
 
			
 
The first of Glenmorangie’s new “Private Collection” line of whiskies for Travel Retail. This one is finished in Pedro Ximenez (PX) sherry. With PX being so rich and intense, and Glenmorangie spirit so subtly complex and delicate, does the sherry dominate here? No, it doesn’t. Still, this is viscous and very textural for a Glenmorangie. I’m picking up 
 drenched with honeyed apricot, toffee almond, chocolate-covered raisin, glazed citrus, and cherry pits, all leading to a leathery, tobacco-tinged finish. A visceral whisky with plenty of grip. Great for after dinner.
-> On page 54 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Ealanta is the fourth release in Glenmorangie’s Private Edition series, and has been aged in heavily-charred virgin white oak casks from Missouri for nineteen years. The result is a nose of American cream soda, milk chocolate, fudge, pineapple, and honey; spicy and creamy. Silky smooth in the mouth, with brittle toffee and orange notes; gently herbal, with a suggestion of cloves and newly-sawn wood. Long in the finish, with citrus fruit, oak, aniseed, and an enduring spicy creaminess.  
      		
 
			
 
Companta—Gaelic for friendship—is the fifth of Glenmorangie’s Private Edition releases. It comprises a blend of whiskies finished in Clos de Tart Grand Cru wine casks and in fortified wine casks from Côtes du Rhône. Big fruity, leathery notes on the nose. Spicy, with sultanas, almonds, and icing sugar. The palate is rich and complex, with cocoa powder, nutmeg, more leather, and redcurrants. Long and fruity in the finish, with vibrant spices. Red berries predominate.
      		
 
			
 
Amber gold color. Rich aromas of complex fruit and vanilla. Thick and rich in body, with a mouth-coating texture. Flavors of honeyed malt, well structured fruit, and vanilla, with a long finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Amber color. Lush, rich aromas of rummy toffee, nuts, vanilla, with interwoven notes of glazed fruit. On the heavy side of medium in body, and silky. There are layers of sweetness on the palate (toffee, caramel, marzipan and dates), becoming nutty with a pleasing oak woodiness to balance the sweetness. Long, dryish finish with notes of spice and fruit. 

      		
 
			
 
Immediately you can tell this is a complex, old, mature whisky — that hint of rancio is there, but there’s more of a beeswax character than on the Adelphi bottling (below), along with the peachiness that often appears in old drams. This is balanced by light coconut, even a hint of grist. The waxiness seen on the nose allows it to cling to the tongue, while the fruits become jellied. Benefits from a drop of water, allowing lemon and vanilla to show. £210
      		
 
			
 
The oldest of a new three-strong range from Glenrothes called the Manse Brae series; the youngest component here is 21 years old. Serious and lightly meaty, the savory characters come at you, mixing gun smoke with cypress, sandalwood, dark chocolate, and dunnage warehouse. The headiness of moist forest floor continues on the tongue along with a burst of honeyed peach. Moving in many directions simultaneously…and slowly. Keep this neat. Classic Rothes. 
€140
      		
 
			
 
A new expression due out in March, positioned between the 12 and 18 year old versions. A fresh and enormously drinkable whisky; very silky, with honeyed malt, delicate citrus and berry fruit, floral notes (heather and lavender), and a hint of cocoa and sea spray. 

      		
 
			
 
Highland Park 12 Year Old boasts individuality and complexity, thanks in part to the use of Orcadian peat in the distillery floor maltings and the employment of ex-sherry casks for maturation. The nose is fragrant and floral, with hints of heather and some spice. Smooth and honeyed on the palate, with citrus fruits, malt, and distinctive tones of wood smoke in the warm, lengthy, slightly peaty finish.
      		
 
			
 
Thor is the first in Highland Park’s new cask strength Valhalla Collection, with a fresh expression inspired by the Nordic gods due to be released annually over the next four years. Ginger, sherry, Christmas spices, wood smoke, vanilla, and a hint of lemon on the complex, confident nose. Notably spicy in the mouth, with peaches, clotted cream, sherry, and more smoke. Long in the finish, with lots of ginger, a little aniseed, and finally, spicy peat.  
      		
 
			
 
This vintage expression from Jura has been matured in three first-fill bourbon casks and then finished for one year in a ruby port pipe. Just 498 bottles have been released. Apricots, pineapple, caramel, butterscotch, sultanas, and white chocolate on the nose. The palate is warm and spicy, with subtle pine and citrus fruits, along with coconut and a hint of peat. Long in the finish with more vanilla before dried fruits and oak kick in. The delicate peat remains.
-> On page 55 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The aromas are tightly bound, but a little water releases them nicely. A powerful dram, with tarry, leafy, coal ash, caramel apple, and driftwood notes; even a little soapy (not necessarily a negative). More subtle floral notes (heather, violet), Earl Grey tea, and smoked fish. Long, damp peat smoke and charcoal finish.

      		
 
			
 
Very smooth for Laphroaig -- the extra aging has mellowed this whisky. Soothing honeyed malt, creamy vanilla, and toffee provide a bed for peat smoke, charcoal, and tar; along with more subtle brine, smoked seaweed, anise, ginger, and citrus. A gentler, creamier, more tactile, less medicinal Laphroaig when compared to some of its siblings. Will you prefer the new 18 year old to the 15 year old it is replacing? That depends. I enjoy the balance and subtle complexity of flavors with the 15 year old, but I also like the enhanced richness and mouth-coating creaminess of the 18. The higher strength (and no chill-filtering) of the 18 is certainly a bonus. (Side note: I know this is a moot point now, but I would like to have seen the 15 year old bottled at 48%, rather than 43%.)
      		
 
			
 
Similar to Laphroaig Quarter Cask, but also finished in oloroso sherry casks. Fruit and smoke: fleshy red berries, red licorice, toffee, ripe barley, coal tar, sun-baked seaweed, peat smoke, and a hint of coffee grounds. Tarry finish. I rated the Quarter Cask a 91, and I think this whisky is similar in quality. If you like sherry-influenced whiskies, then go for the Triple Wood. If not, then consider the Quarter Cask. (Currently exclusive to Travel Retail and European specialist retailers.)
      		
 
			
 
Antique amber color. Aromas of toffee and malt, with interwoven dried fruit, flowers, and spices-a real potpourri. Rich, lush body. Rich flavors of toffee, wood resin spices, and citrus, finishing with notes of malt, toffee, and a hint of leather and smoke. 

      		
 
			
 
This is like a blast from the past, with much in common with the sherried Cask Strength of old, and a welcome treat for any fan of the big, sherried Macallans. All the red berry and blood orange notes are present on the nose, along with cocoa and a dusty smokiness. The palate is full, velvety and chewy, with Christmas cake, oranges, and some nuttiness. Nutmeg and cinnamon fill out the mouth feel, before a long and classic sherried finish. 
      		
 
			
 
On more familiar ground with this G&M bottling of one of Speyside’s most iconic single malts, this is Macallan in full-on sherried form. Highly aromatic with powdered clove, hints of incense and fig, behind which is cacao, Bolivar cigar, and molasses. The palate has immediate smoke and surprisingly gentle tannins — the inherent oiliness of the spirit keeping any grip at bay. Very long, leathery, prune-like (think armagnac), and dense. A classic after-dinner mouth-filler.
      		
 
			
 
Here is Macallan in full-blown masculine mode. Initially it seems tight and (sherry) cask driven, but soon you are taken into a winter kitchen with scents of venison, and appropriate rowanberry edges adding a sweet and sour fruitiness. That wild berry note is given another nudge by a whiff of burning juniper. The palate shows it to be thick with a quivering mass of black fruits, and a finish of molasses and licorice. A feast. £75
      		
 
			
 
Rooted in the earth and redolent of late autumn. There’s a plummy thread that runs through this range; here we’ve gone to prune, mixed with dried cherries, and a sweet/savory edge whose whiff of heavy rose petal is reminiscent of Barolo. Robust, yet sweet. Heady, like chocolate-covered Turkish Delight. The palate has oloroso notes alongside Assam-like tannins. One to have with water on the side. Classical in structure and aromatics, but that vinous sweetness is new.  £120
      		
 
			
 
Rich amber in hue, sweet, and mellow with initial 
 sherry notes that give way to Mortlach meatiness; here a lamb tagine with prune, apricot, and gravy juices. This elegance gives way to a fascinating palate mix of the sweet and the savory with citrus, sultana, and a rowanberry jab on the end mingling with just a bit of smoke. Everything mellowed by time and oak. Very good indeed. £99
      		
 
			
 
The introductory expression of the range shows a further example of the widening of the Mortlach style. Stewed and dried fruits mingle with light earth notes, wet Labrador, supple shoe leather, and varnish. A drop of water is all that’s needed to add a savory element and even some funky fruitiness reminiscent of cooking agave. The palate is big and chocolaty with some meat underneath. Hefty but elegant. The distillery character is not only intact, but enhanced. £55/500 ml
-> On page 56 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This is Rare Old at higher strength for folks who haunt Travel Retail outlets. The upping of strength also changes the dynamic, making things sweeter with mushed berries and Seville orange, but also deeper, with more overt meatiness, stewed tea, and the same varnished note. Dense, thick, stewed orchard fruits are on the palate alongside some acetone and, with water, burning rosemary and dry licorice. Similar, but with more heft. £75/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
The seventh limited edition release of Port Ellen whiskies by Diageo. Not as vibrant and intense as younger bottlings (particularly on the nose), but nicely matured with a satisfying sweet foundation. Notes of toffee and roasted nuts permeate though the peat kiln smoke, coal tar, fish nets, and charred oak. Seaweed and brine, more reserved mid-palate, emerges noticeably on the finish. The Port Ellen bottlings are getting older (the distillery closed in 1983) and they are getting more expensive. This one still captures the essence of Port Ellen. 

      		
 
			
 
These Port Ellen whiskies are becoming increasingly rare since the distillery closed down for good in 1983. This is a very good example of an old-fashioned Islay whisky: never heavy, but with lots of kick. There’s plenty of wet leaf, bonfire smoke, coal tar, and some earthy, damp kiln notes and brine. But you’ll discover a lovely honeyed maltiness for balance, along with tangerine, dirty martini, and cocoa for complexity. Smoky, briny finish. There will be a time when some of us will tell the next generation of whisky drinkers about the joys of Port Ellen. Mare sure you’re one of those telling the story, not listening to it. (Exclusive to Kensington Wine Market.) $250 (Canadian)
      		
 
			
 
Port Ellen, for sure! Very old-fashioned in nature: intertwined notes of tarry rope, coal soot, rooty peat, toffee, dark chocolate, and walnuts, spiked with coffee bean, anise, cracked peppercorn, and a hint of ginger. Dry, smoky, long, slightly austere finish. This Port Ellen is a bit moody (maybe even has an attitude problem), but I’m not complaining.
      		
 
			
 
Recently bottled by Duncan Taylor in their non-colored, non-chill filtered NC2 range, this 13 year old expression of Springbank initially exhibits tinned pears on the nose, then smoked fish cooked in butter, coconut oil, brine, and a hint of lemon. More sweet wood smoke with time, turning to char. The palate opens with profound, sweet fruit, swiftly followed by salt, lime, and medicinal notes. Lingering, with ginger in the pleasantly oaky finish. £64
      		
 
			
 
The latest limited release of 21 year old Springbank has been matured in a mix of bourbon and sherry casks. Sherry and bourbon notes are well integrated on the early nose, which follows up with succulent tropical fruits, toffee, and a whiff of earthy peat. The palate is complex, confident, and oily, with dry sherry notes, almonds, figs, vanilla, wood smoke, and a hint of the sea. The lengthy finish boasts caramel, cinnamon, brine, and soft peat. £182
      		
 
			
 
Antique gold color. A pleasingly aromatic aroma of dried fruit, floral notes, malt, and light toffee. Medium in body, and slightly chewy. Its flavors are well-balanced, deep, and complex. Toffee, almonds, and sweet malt notes, with interwoven notes of fruit. The palate ultimately dries out with dried fruit, herbs and nuts on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
This is one of a trio from Chivas Bros., who every year release limited editions of 500 ml cask strength bottlings from a selection of its estates. These are predominantly only for sale on site or by mail order through www.maltwhiskydistilleries.com.

My pick of this batch. Strathisla’s a small, traditional distillery whose make is mostly pressed into service for the Chivas Regal blends. It’s a hard to pin down malt, and it’s this elusive character that shows here: firm then soft, fragrant then deep. The nose is intense and spicy with wax, nougat, chocolate, hazelnut, and fresh-opened banana. The palate is explosive with real presence and power, whose firm core is softened by honey and poached fruits. Complex is the word. £37
      		
 
			
 
Fresh, vibrant. Appetizingly briny, with notes of seaweed, fishnets, lemongrass, smoke, and damp peat. A bed of light toffee provides contrast and balance. It finishes with a knockout punch: powerfully peppery and salty. This whisky remains a beautifully dynamic and bold whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Matured in amoroso casks. The amoroso softens Talisker’s fiery personality and adds a gentle sweetness not normally found in Talisker. There’s a lot going on here-notes of toffee and dark chocolate, layered with bitter orange, seaweed, kippers, smoked nuts, damp peat, and kalamata olives, finishing with a peppery glow. Not an every day dram-one has to be in the mood for a whisky like this. (With sausages during brunch, perhaps?) 

-> On page 57 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
For me, Talisker 30 year olds have paled in comparison to the same distillery’s 20 and 25 year olds. This, however, immediately shows promise. Gold in color, and while it’s another one that starts ever so slightly restrained, the giveaway peppery note soon reveals itself as smoked pimento and Szechuan pepper, mixed with extra virgin olive oil spread over hot smoked salmon. There’s also a touch of putty — something which you usually only see in youthful expressions — suggesting that here’s another refill maturation. 
As with many of these older whiskies, water isn’t the best option for the palate, but a drop does help release the sweet fruitiness that always lurks in Talisker’s heart, this time accompanied by an herbal note (mint and fennel). It’s almost as if it is looking back at itself as an 18 year old, but here the firm granitic grip of age takes hold.
The palate starts slowly but opens well with a gentle, yet assertive revealing of the aromas on the nose. It seems to dip in energy just in the center before sparking back to life when the smoke emerges, like the last flash of defiance from an old-timer. 
      		
 
			
 
Another that should need no introduction. The thing to look for in Talisker, as with all smoky whiskies, is sweetness that gives the requisite balance to the drying effect of smoke. Underneath Talisker’s smoke, which ain't as all-pervading as Lagavulin, is a sweet pear-like quality. When young there are notes of the land: heather, moor, sweet seaweed, and a finish that has a distinctive cracked black pepper hit.
      		
 
			
 
A whisky that defies its age. It is remarkably clean and fresh, with no suggestion of excessive oak. Fragrant aroma, with notes of vanilla, coconut, honeyed malt, cereal grain, and linseed. Similar follow through on the palate, with a texture that is soft, lightly oily, and soothing. Clean finish. One of the best Tamdhu whiskies I’ve tasted. 

      		
 
			
 
Antique gold color. Fragrant aroma, with floral notes, soft honey tones, vanilla, and delicate fruit (orange and lemon). Light to medium in body and soft in texture. Flavors are similar to the whisky's aroma, very clean, and with great balance-the woody notes one would expect from a whisky this old are kept in check.
      		
 
			
 
According to the Christie family who owned North of Scotland Distillery before it was sold to DCL in 1982 (and closed it shortly thereafter,) they would purchase the least expensive grain possible to make their grain whisky. In 1964, it was barley. The barley, combined with the fact that the whisky is finished off in port casks, makes for a surprisingly rich, sweet, and fruity grain whisky, expressing notes of demerara sugar, perfumed candles, cherry almond tart, caramel and vanilla. Remarkably restrained wood notes for such a mature whisky, which expresses itself mostly in its soft, creamy finish. Unique among whiskies. 

      		
 
			
 
This is a blend of straight bourbon and two straight rye whiskeys: thus the name. Very interesting indeed. But how does it taste? It’s clean, crisp, and quite vibrant (especially on the nose). The rye note is evident throughout. It starts out more like a high rye-content bourbon, with the molasses, caramel, coconut cream, sweet corn, and honey-kissed fruit marrying nicely with the dried spice (vanilla, cinnamon, brisk mint). But then on the latter half of the palate, the rye really kicks in. The whiskey gets bold, the rye becomes intense (almost piercing), with a dried spice finish. Some whiskeys are even keeled throughout. This one is more of an adventure. Not complex enough for “classic status” (>95), but a very distinctive, enjoyable whiskey. 
      		
 
			
 
A blend of two straight whiskeys: a very young 2 year old high rye content whiskey and a 16 year old rye whiskey with a lower rye content. Perhaps the spiciest American whiskey I have ever tasted, yet at the same time, quite tame and mellow. Complex notes of mint, clove, cinnamon, licorice root, pine nuts, and dark chocolate, with a surprising dose of gin botanicals throughout. A soft underbelly of caramel, sweet corn, and soothing vanilla provides an interesting counterpoint. Very easy-drinking, too (hard to believe it’s 46%). Intriguing, and a must-try for rye whiskey aficionados — even if only to satisfy your curiosity.
      		
 
			
 
An exciting blend of straight rye whiskeys finished in French oak and port barrels. Beautifully spiced (warming cinnamon, crisp mint), tamed by caramel and vanilla fudge. Red and black raspberry, plum, dried citrus, and wood shavings add complexity. Warming finish. Nicely balanced and very distinctive. (
 
)
      		
 
			
 
Bottled in a glass pot still decanter. Soft and elegant on the nose and palate, and very well balanced. An incredibly drinkable whiskey. There’s no age statement on the bottle, but it was bottled at just the right time, based on its great balance of flavors. Notes of vanilla, coconut, and crème brulee provide a base for emerging notes of cedar wood shavings, cinnamon, soft mint, and a hint of fennel. A very graceful bourbon. 

      		
 
			
 
The unusual distilling process and some maturation in Madeira casks has given standard Penderyn a liqueur-like, perfumey quality many whisky fans don’t care for. This is a single bourbon cask bottling of the 11th cask the distillery ever filled, to mark its 10th anniversary, and is less cloying, less feminine, and more gutsy than the standard version. It’s also very palatable and of excellent quality. Some will make it to America, but the price tag will deter all but the most passionate. 
-> On page 58 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Penderyn will miss distiller Gillian MacDonald, who has gone to work at Glenmorangie, because it has been moving up the gears of late. This is a traveling circus of a whisky, with all sorts of oral treats to keep you entertained. It's not for the faint-hearted. There are rich stewed fruits, baked apple, blueberries, and spirit-soaked black and red berries all delivered with a power punch. Great. £30
      		
 
			
 
Penderyn quotes a respected writer on its website, saying that no one does port-influenced whisky better. This bottling certainly makes the claim. It was a single cask, but there have been others equally as impressive, and there will be more. This is brash, colorful, unsubtle, and a bit daft — so was comedian Tommy Cooper — but still unforgettable and easy to fall in love with.  256 bottles.  £146
      		
 
			
 
Kilbeggan, once overshadowed by its stable-mates, is the rising star in the Cooley repertoire; an active distillery once more and capable of thoroughbred gems like this. This isn’t your typical Irish whiskey at all, so be warned.  Sure there are lashings of soft caramel, peach crumble, and vanilla up front, but then the wood takes over and big waves of tannin and chili pepper kick in. It’s 40% ABV but it delivers a much harder punch. Limited edition release. 
      		
 
			
 
The first "big" release from this Swedish distillery.  I'm very impressed.  It's youthful, but not immature.  Very intriguing, too.  Bright notes of ripe orchard fruit and soothing vanilla cream on the nose and palate, along with more subtle bramble, silky honey, and caramel, toasted coconut, marshmallow, bread dough, and grist.  Teasing smoke emerges occasionally, adding to this whisky's delightful nature.  Clean, toasted oak finish.  I particularly enjoy the complex interplay between the fruit and sweetness.  A fun whisky with a playful personality.  More, please!  
      		
 
			
 
Mackmyra continues to play a far more sophisticated game than it is given credit for, releasing pleasant and easy drinking mainstream malts, and then packing a punch with one-off oddball single casks. So this is an utter delight and among the very best Mackmyras released. Vanilla, banana, sweet jellybeans, and some toffee all playing Mr. Hyde. Dr. Jekyll pops up with earthy salt notes. Medical gauze and pepper for a savory finale.
      		
 
			
 
The Real McCoy! It's said that during Prohibition Bill McCoy serviced the better speakeasies with proper Cutty Sark; hence the name. If this is a recreation of what they might have been drinking back then, you can see why they kept fighting over it. This is another bold, earthy, smoky blend with oily, industrial notes. There's crabapple, smoke, bitter lemon, grapefruit, and even black currant. It would seem blended whisky is where it's at right now! Great stuff.  
      		
 
			
 
Imagine sipping this sophisticated libation at the supper club turned out in your best bib and tucker. There’s a purity to it, with aromas of fresh red apples, raisins in honey, ground cinnamon, and nutmeg, leading to bitter orange oils and a storm of black pepper fading to tropical fruit, layered caramel, and sugared almonds. Hold this long in the mouth, as it possesses a changing, multi-faceted character. As Cab Calloway said, “This is 
” (3,456 bottles) £650
      		
 
			
 
Distilled from Bear Republic Big Bear Black Stout, alambic pot distilled, aged 29 months in used French oak. Gooey nose, with lots of dark chocolate, toffee, fruit (ripe honeydew, Asian pear, red plum); no hint of the 49.5% ABV heat. Deliciously layered palate: dry malt, juicy fruit, and savory wood spice, sweet malt and chocolate, and a finish that’s sweet, light, and quite refreshing and inviting. Lives up to the Charbay hype!
      		
 
			
 
This (rather young) Islay distillery’s second release. Like the first, it’s aged for about three years and then finished in sherry casks—this time for a shorter two and a half months. Its flavor is similar to the first release.
Once again, I am quite impressed. It’s very mature for its age, with good viscosity, showing smoldering peat, coal tar, black licorice stick, burnt dark berried fruit, thick-cut marmalade, shoo-fly pie (think molasses), toffee apple, cocoa powder, cinnamon, and a suggestion of wet sheep. Long, peat smoke finish.£47

      		
 
			
 
Although one of the old Speyside crew (along with Mortlach, Glenfarclas, and Macallan) Balmenach has, inexplicably in my mind, never even achieved cult status. It has simply kept on making rich, powerful, worm tub-condensed spirit for a multitude of blends. This rare bottling therefore is hugely welcome and shows a friskier than usual side — earthy for sure and a lick of leather as well, but also walnut and sultana. The palate is deep and languorous with a savory edge. £145 (Not available in the U.S.)
-> On page 59 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
In the UK, Trick or Treat is still linked to Halloween and all things spooky. So this unlucky 13 is at 49% (4+9) and is priced in British pounds at £66.60. It just happens to be the best thing the distillery has done so far. The extra strength, lots of honeycomb sweetness, and a big hit of peat make this a coming of age whisky, with no immaturity and bags of great flavors. £67
      		
 
			
 
This single malt bottling shows Miyagikyo’s emollient style at its best. This is all about super-soft orchard fruits; think apricot and sweet persimmon, though there’s also a touch of sweet sawdust and even a whiff of pine sap and milk chocolate. It demonstrates the classic Japanese trick of being both clear and precise in its aromas, as well as being heightened in intensity. The palate is a little slow to start with, offering a mix of spruce and pine, then those soft fruits carry you onward. 
In some ways the gentle charms of Miyagikyo are overshadowed by the rambunctious nature of From The Barrel and Yoichi, but soft is a worthy element in Japanese — nay, all — whisky. £76.95. Price in US dollars converted at time of review.
      		
 
			
 
A rarely-seen cult whisky made by distilling a 100% malted barley mash in a Coffey still and, in this expression, then aged in a remade hogshead. This is firm and complex on the nose with vanilla pod, crème caramel, and ripe banana. The palate manages to balance the silky depths and unctuous flow with nutmeg and a light cereal grip. Grain, malt, or something else? Who cares? Just seek it out. €155
      		
 
			
 
This is original “red wax” Maker’s Mark that received additional aging in barrels containing internal “seared” French oak staves. The original Maker’s Mark, being a wheated bourbon (instead of rye, which is typically used), is rather mellow and easy-to-drink. The French oak staves in “46” add firm, complex dry spices (led by warming cinnamon, followed by nutmeg and clove), herb (a suggestion of Green Chartreuse, perhaps?), and some polished leather “grip”, which dovetails well with Maker’s trademark layered sweetness (caramel, vanilla, a hint of honey). I’m also picking up some dried fruit in the background. The seared oak stave influence is somewhat aggressive, but never to the point of being excessive.
      		
 
			
 
Brighter, bigger, and cleaner than its 10 year old stablemate (sty mate?), The Boss Hog squeals delightedly with spring flowers, fall fruit stands, heavy spicy cloves, and delicate esters. The alcohol tickles your nose but is soft on the palate, where fresh-baked rye bread mingles with dusty rye flour and Werther’s caramels. Fruity currents rise over sweet hot chocolate before the sweet spiciness returns for a long, slow fade. Great cask-strength whiskey with no need for water.
      		
 
			
 
More Canadian core rye from WhistlePig, this time at full-bore. It’s strong with rye, sweet with melon and dark chocolate notes, but with a wood character like the unfinished inside of an antique oak wardrobe. The antique wood is strong in the mouth, an oddly elegant note, but afterward comes the melon and chocolate, and oily, coiling rye. Interestingly complicated; a bit hard to make friends, but worth the time and effort.
      		
 
			
 
6 year old MGP rye at full Booker’s-style unfiltered proof. Strong barrel/warehouse reek, some pepper, and a hint of dill. Shock: drinkable at 61%. Rich barrel flavors: oak, light maple, and custardy vanilla, albeit quite hot. Mint and pepper zip around the mouth; now on the tongue, now on the roof, racing down the throat, a big, active whiskey. Finish bubbles on with pepper and prickle, daring you to stick in a quarter and ride it again. An experience.
      		
 
			
 
Knob was one of the first bourbons I had when I started taking whiskey seriously, and it’s still a kicker. No-nonsense, flint-hard nose: slickly-polished oak furniture, cinnamon stick, cracked rye, wet cornmeal, hard candies. Bang! A lean whiskey that gets in your mouth and explodes with rye spice and cinnamon candy, a sharp wedge that opens you right up. The finish echoes: oak, a dying fire, clean and almost crisp. Emphatic, bright, and swift. Value Pick
      		
 
			
 
This is from Dutch distiller Zuidam and it's the third exceptional bottling in a row. The PX here refers to the 
cask used in maturation and this is almost liqueur-like, with plummy fruits, gooseberry, damson jam, and overripe plum. But there's lots going on here on top, with a dusting of cocoa, some perfumey notes, and a sniff of pepper. The jam keeps fighting back though, and there's apricot in there at the end. €75
      		
 
			
 
Belgian whisky maker Etienne Boullion takes help and advice from Bruichladdich distiller Jim McEwan, and it shows. Now the owner of the old Caperdonich stills and set for major expansion, Belgian Owl is literally on the move. Let's hope it retains the greatness of this malt. This is the distillery's best offering yet: a sweet, rich, vanilla-laced fruity dessert whisky that is both refreshing and very more-ish. Alcoholic tinned fruits, particularly pear. 
-> On page 60 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
French whisky encompasses a wide range of approaches and flavors, from the hugely aromatic P&M from Corsica to the understated Alsace whiskies of Elsass, Meyer’s, and Uberbach. There is a trio of whiskies from Brittany. Guy le Lat’s Eddu uses buckwheat to create a whisky that out-ryes rye. Distilerie Warengheim makes the most widely-seen whisky, Amorik. But for this writer the one to watch is Glann ar Mor (‘by the sea’), established in 2005 by Jean Donnay. A traditionalist approach: direct fire, wooden washbacks, wild yeast, and worm tubs yield a single malt whisky that, though barely over the 3 year legal limit, is already complex: think barley sugar and apricot. The fire and the worms give the mid-palate some real weight (boding well for longer-term maturation), but the slow distillation has added floral notes that dance on top. £55 
      		
 
			
 
Kornog is the peated version of Glann ar Mor and the whisky is released in batches. This one is the most intense, with oily, charcoally peat most evident. But what makes this whisky particularly special is a dark chocolate and lime candy heart, the concentrated pear notes, and a refreshing sweet theme that holds off the oil and smoke elsewhere. Think Connemara and you're not far off. €60
      		
 
			
 
When the news arrived that a distillery was being built in Taiwan, the whisky world pretty much dismissed it. When Kavalan appeared at a precocious 42 months, it sat up and took notice. Owned by food and beverage conglomerate King Car, Kavalan started producing in 2006 with blender Ian Chang at the helm — and a hotline to consultant Dr. Jim Swan. Taiwan’s tropical climate pushes the maturation cycle along at a ferocious rate, but the key here is its complexity. Maybe it’s auto-suggestion, but I could swear there’s ginseng in here, as well as honeycomb and black cherry pie filling. Fresh and clean, the spirit is rich and accompanied with great wood.  Mature whisky in three years? It’s an accountant’s dream! 
      		
 
			
 
Here Jim Swan has taken the bold step of double maturing an already quick maturing spirit, but it works. Blueberries and rich oak are to the fore, while Kavalan’s cherry accents act as the link between spirit and Port. Think rosehips and crème de mures. Thick and liquorous. List price is approximate.
      		
 
			
 
If you didn’t know what it was, you’d swear this was an old and venerable big sherried whisky, and it takes some accepting that it’s still a kitten. The clues are there: hints of immature green fruit and reedy barley, and the finish is sweet and soft, with none of the astringency of an old wood-influenced malt. But it tastes wonderful: rich, sweet, and grapey, with gooey plums and juicy raisins. A sprinkling of pepper dust reins everything in perfectly. €155 Currently not available in the U.S. 
      		
 
			
 
King Car is the name of the Taiwanese company that owns the Kavalan brand and this lavishly packaged single malt is its standard bearer. It's not hard to see why. More subtle and complex than some earlier bottlings of Kavalan, this has an exotic fruit, cream toffee, and soft banana nose, and has bitter orange, dark chocolate, and pepper on the palate. It's rapier-sharp, clean, and drying rather than sweet. 
      		
 
			
 
The mark of a good distillery is consistently producing 85 points-plus whiskies, and with this batch Kavalan's going into double digits. If the distillery has a weakness, it's that sometimes it overstates its case and makes even the Aussies look subtle and nuanced. Not here. This is a delicious dessert whisky, with vanilla and toffee in abundance and some sugar candy. But having made its case, it steps back and is surprisingly gentle. Kavalan with subtlety? Scary! 
      		
 
			
 
This is the distillery's flagship brand and it's up there with anything New World whisky has to offer. The nose is subtle, with plum and peach; on the palate there are chewy orange and other citrus notes, honey, coconut, and caramel. The finish is sweet and rounded. A delicate and sophisticated whisky that reflects the rise and rise of this distillery. A$88
      		
 
			
 
The folks at Angel’s Envy once again push the envelope with this 95% rye whiskey finished in Caribbean rum casks. Vibrant, spicy rye notes (cinnamon and mint) are tamed by rich maple syrup, graham cracker crust, nutty toffee, candy floss, subtle tropical fruit, and creamy vanilla. Warm, spicy, rummy finish. This is a mood whiskey—not one I would drink every day—but the flavors marry nicely and the sweetness tames this high-testosterone rye whiskey. Bonus points for uniqueness. Editor's Choice
      		
 
			
 
Released with no age statement, Fettercairn Fior contains 15 percent heavily-peated whisky matured in first-fill ex-bourbon barrels, along with a proportion of 14 and 15 year old spirit. The result is a bold and complex whisky with real nose presence; smoke, sherry, toffee, vanilla, and oranges merge on the nose, while the palate showcases more smoke and toffee, plus spices, oak, and licorice in the lengthy finish. £36 Not currently available in the U.S.
-> On page 61 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The third Taylor release, and the gentlest, most even-keeled of the three. Black raspberry, mulberry, maple syrup, oak resin, dates, soft leather, and spice (mint, cinnamon, clove, vanilla) round out the palate. Very drinkable for 100 proof, and with plenty of character.
      		
 
			
 
If you wondered when you saw “50%,” this is indeed bottled in bond whiskey, with all the requirements that go with it. The nose is just this side of hot and brings parched corn, sawn maple wood, spicy hard candy, and dry spearmint leaf. Bright and spicy on the tongue; more candy and honey, and hints of teaberry and licorice that develop into the finish. A better package of flavor and price than the earlier Taylor releases; quite enjoyable.  
      		
 
			
 
The last official Convalmore remains one of my top whiskies. Here is a different meditation on age. There’s soft leather, coal smoke, and polished brass. The distillery’s waxiness is a spent candle in a deserted chapel, the harvest festival fruits wrinkling on the altar. Amazingly, in the mouth a shaft of honeyed sunlight comes through to transform the scene into one of life. Everything glows, the wax returns, and then, with the smoke increasing, the light fades. Old, and fascinating.
      		
 
			
 
Yes, 23 years is a long time to age bourbon. And yes, there’s plenty of oak influence. But there’s an underlying sweetness that balances the oak spice (with this particular cask; others may vary). Chewy in texture, with toffee, dates, fig cake (with nuts), barrel char, tobacco, leather, and a dusting of cocoa.
      		
 
			
 
Straight, 100% unmalted barley whiskey. This must be a first in modern times. The huge nose gushes unusual aromas of fresh-turned earth, wet corn cobs, sour green apples, anise, cilantro, and dill. An herbal nose becomes an herbal palate bathed in soft 
 and hot, peppery spices. Earthy notes turn pleasantly musty, like damp straw. Finishes long on Scottish porridge. Like all Masterson’s, this barley whiskey is from Alberta Distillers. And yes, Canadian whiskey with an “e.”
      		
 
			
 
A medley of well-integrated, bright flavors including acetone, green apples, soft floral perfume, vague tannins, sweet pipe tobacco, brown sugar, hints of spar varnish, fresh-cut wood, vanilla galore, soft well-integrated spices, and subdued white pepper. It feels like corn syrup, with hot spices on the sides of the tongue and hints of oak lumber throughout. Rich and full, yet light, fresh, and estery. Long, lingering, hot spices on a sweet, slightly fruity finish. Ends on cinnamon bark. 
      		
 
			
 
This third single cask release was distilled in 2002 and spent two-thirds of its maturation in 
 after 4 years in bourbon wood. The nose brings cranberry, bramble, smoked meats over a pit fire, stewed apple, Worcestershire sauce, and damp sphagnum. The taste is silky, displaying an array of citrus and red berry fruits. It’s amazingly gentle and tender given the strength. Water brings cider apples, ginger, and spices with a finish of bubblegum and boiled mint candies. €90
      		
 
			
 
Two years ago I included this at a London whisky and music festival for 1,000 cool and trendy young music fans. This was the star of the show. When it says “peated,” it means sooty, charcoal-like church incense, with smoked meats and salami. It's intense, unforgettable, and not unlike a big smoky Swiss cheese. Up there with Balcones and Corsair, IMHO (that’s “In My Humble Opinion.” I'm down with the kids, you see). €55
      		
 
			
 
Distilled at Buffalo Trace in Kentucky but aged mostly in Virginia at the A. Smith Bowman distillery. This is a bold, hearty bourbon: not elegant or refined, rather a bit mean and moody at times. Sweeter, gentler notes of vanilla, caramel, nougat, mocha, and candied fruit wrestle with more aggressive tobacco, leather, and damp forest floor notes. Warming, cinnamon-tinged, gripping finish. A rewarding whiskey for those with an adventurous soul.
      		
 
			
 
Aged, then finished, in Bowman barrels that held Hardywood Park brewery gingerbread stout in between. A beautifully spicy bourbon—but not aggressively so—with cinnamon, clove, and nutmeg. The spice is presented on a bed of layered sweetness (vanilla, caramel, and soft maple syrup), rounded out by subtle candied fruit and nuts. Nicely rounded, fun and easy to drink. One of my favorites so far from Bowman.
-> On page 62 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Unlike their colleagues in Scotland, Japanese distillers do not exchange stock for their blending requirements. This means that each distillery is set up to produce a wide range of styles. Hakushu uses four different types of malt (unpeated to heavy) run through four pairs of differently-shaped stills. Each single malt is a different blend of these bases. While still herbal, this example shows more sherried notes along with sour orange zest, tropical fruit, and some smoke. Complex.£105
      		
 
			
 
As the price may suggest, there ain’t a lot of this around, but to see Hakushu at its most robust, try and find a bar with a bottle. Again, the sherry component has been upped, as has the smoked element. There is, however, always that graceful Hakushu purity running through, this time expressed as rhubarb and strawberry. The palate shows great oily depth, hints of walnut, and yes, a sprig of mint tying it to the 10 year old. £555
      		
 
			
 
Intriguing herbal/medicinal nose, with notes of pepper, grass, dried hay, dried flowers, orange peel, and licorice. Sweet but lively and light on the palate, as the orange explodes and the whisky boldly appears, wrapped in honey and herbs. The finish is herbal and sweet as the whisky strolls off into the distance. Overall, quite complex and rewarding.
      		
 
			
 
You have to take your hat off to Berry Bros. & Rudd’s Doug McIvor, who is whisky's answer to Bruce Springsteen: consistently brilliant, complex, spanning the generations, and in the form of his life. This just doesn't let up, with plenty of smoke and peat in the mix, but with citrus fruits, some plummy depths, and a vanilla cushion. It’s balanced perfectly. Born to run? You betcha.
      		
 
			
 
It's not made clear which Islay malts are included in this blended malt, but whoever's responsible for this has brought the big guns. This successfully pulls off an intense one-two, with hard hitting Islay peat and brine on the one hand, and some rich sweetness on the other, making for a mouth-coatingly rich and intense whisky. The malts pack down together like a rugby scrum and combine with impressive intensity. €36
      		
 
			
 
This contains hops and isn't matured for at least 3 years, so in Europe it can't be classed as whisky, but it's positive proof that some of the experimentation so widespread among American craft distillers is finding its way to Europe. This might be flabby and sappy, but it's sweet and utterly charming, and there is ginger, menthol, and glacé cherry in the mix. But most of all there's tinned pear, and I LOVE tinned pear. Excellently made, too. My new guilty pleasure. £33
      		
 
			
 
A blend of three different types of whiskey -- malt whiskey, grain whiskey, and a third component which is said to be a malt whiskey produced from crystal malt. Brewers and homebrewers know crystal malt well, a slightly caramelized version of malted barley. Its rich texture suggests a decent malt content for a blend. Layers of sweetness (honeyed vanilla, rummy molasses, toasted marshmallow) are balanced by toasted nuts, dried fruit, and dark chocolate. Very dynamic and with plenty of grit. Smartly bottled at 46%.
      		
 
			
 
Irish whiskey and rum aren't a common combination, but Bushmills makes a strong case for it with a 19 year old whiskey finished in a rum cask. The rum's influence is clearly present on the nose, with brown sugar that supports Bushmills’ toasted malt. On the palate the rum's dark molasses complements Bushmills’ chocolate malty goodness. Everything balances out in the mid-palate with the addition of oak, which carries through to a semi-dry finish. Superb integration of unlikely cask mates.  
      		
 
			
 
The first vintage Suntory Yamazaki offered in the U.S. A portion of this whisky is aged in Japanese oak. Heavy aroma, with lush sherried fruit and deep juicy oak, marrying with firmly dry and spicy oak resin (the Japanese oak influence is obvious). This same profile follows through on the palate: ripe berried fruit, raisin, blackberry jam, plum spiced with cinnamon, vanilla spearmint, roasted nuts and gripping leather. All this, lying on a bed of molasses and toffee. The Japanese oak really kicks in on the invigoratingly spicy, warm, resinous finish. Quite elderly in nature, but remains very exciting and dynamic, even with all the oak.

      		
 
			
 
Mizunara—or Japanese oak—was considered inferior for many years. Only recently have its extraordinary aromatic qualities been appreciated. These are immediately apparent on the nose: aloes, wood incense, sandalwood, cinnamon balls, sour cherry, and apple, becoming more gingery with water. Intense and acidic in the mouth, there are tart, stewed red fruits, pomegranate, and citrus. Lightly bitter tannins add to the complexity, as does the smoke rising from the smoldering incense stick. The most significant Japanese whisky of the year?  £250
-> On page 63 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Does it do exactly what it says on the tin? You betcha! This is big, and it's smoky, and if you're a fan of Islay malts, then it's right up your street. There's more to it than just smoke, though. There's stewed apple on the nose as well as steam engine oil, and on the palate there's gooseberry, spearmint, and apple pip. But as you'd expect, the peat lingers. 
      		
 
			
 
So which independent bottler comes out in the 'Big' battle of the Islay blended malts? Given this is bottled at a lower strength and it's at a lower price, I'm calling it a draw. The latest batch of this is the best yet, with Ardbeg, Caol Ila, and Bowmore the main components, although there is also some Port Ellen in the mix. So you know what to expect—and it doesn't disappoint. Big AND peaty.
      		
 
			
 
Brace yourself. This takes peat to the extreme, conjuring up a moist, chocolate slab of peat being cut and lifted out of the bog. So smoky, you will feel like you’re breathing in the dense clouds rising above the smoldering kilns. A punchy thwack of peat at full strength, and even if you cut it with water, it only highlights salty fishboxes and some buttery caramels cowering from the backdraft. A deliberately singular character, but utterly brilliant nonetheless. £46
      		
 
			
 
Some of the oldest American malt whiskey joins this 30th anniversary mingling, finished in a pear eau de vie barrel, a nod to the distillery’s origins. The nose is elegant, deep, and clearly touched by the pear and oak. There’s creaminess in the mouth, a perfect weight, rich nutty sweetness balanced by wood; it all slides into a warming finish, and pear is all around. A bit too much pear, actually; though I love pears, that’s my one complaint.
      		
 
			
 
This release is based on a mash done at Sierra Nevada brewery, aged in eight different types of casks (including apple brandy and white wine) running from 4 to 15 years old. Delicate fruit, nuts, and sweet malt combine like perfect pastry in the nose. Add a bit of unsweetened chocolate on the palate, finishing with a lingering reminiscence of every bit of flavor, and you have a beautifully integrated whiskey that is unmistakably St. George. Delightful.
      		
 
			
 
A delicate dusting of exotic fruits and fragrant flower blossoms tailors this otherwise robust all-corn whisky to the Asian palate. Long development in the glass and in the mouth is typical of whisky that has spent many years in once-used barrels. East meets west as mellow oak caramels, pithy dragonfruit, and sour-sweet passion fruit temper fresh-cut red cedar, fragrant lilacs, bitter-sweet citrus fruit, and scorching white pepper. Rich and mouth coating, it fades slowly to sweetness. (Taiwan only) T$2,035
      		
 
			
 
A symphony of delicate exotic fruits in light syrup. The silky mouthfeel bolsters flourishes of sourish kumquats and tangerines, while a delicate oaky foundation supports bursts of hot peppery spices. Sweet Christmas spices harmonize gently with creamy vanilla. Persimmon, mild pears, sweet lemon, sandalwood, and hints of incense each take their turn. The sweet citrus finish is a fitting finale to a subtle yet complex and seamlessly integrated dram that carefully balances heat with fruit. 
NT$2,500
      		
 
			
 
Very limited and therefore at the top end of the price range. Distiller Alex Chasko says that every time he tastes it he's taken back in time to R.E.M.'s “Green” tour, so what's not to love? Dried apple dustiness gives way to pineapple, melon, and kiwifruit. It's all very sweet until late on, when spice cuts in.
      		
 
			
 
WHACK! The spicy smack of the nose sends me to check the mashbill; sure enough, this is 38% rye. The nose fumes with youthful zest: cinnamon, bright mint, sun-warmed green grass. Pour some on the palate for more explosive entertainment; sweet cinnamon red-hots burst, corn pops, and the oak burns on into the rye-high finish. This is one excitable boy of a bourbon, and it’s got me humming along. Impressive. 
      		
 
			
 
A star is born. Stauning is a fledgling Danish distillery whose whiskies are 4 years old. Much as I support new world whiskies, many of them are works in progress. This is, though, the most exciting release since Glann ar Mor of France hit the scene. It's very peaty, rich, fruity, and full, and it's nearly flawless, with few indicators of its youth. This is hard to find, but make a note to snap up the third edition. 895 Krone/500 ml
-> On page 64 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Deep amber. Big, resinous, and almost heathery, with significant cask influence for a decade-old dram. The aroma is like a cobbler’s workshop: oils, leather, grease, polish, and then licorice. On the palate, there’s the prune notes of armagnac, the sweetness and cedar flavors of old rum, and very Rothes-esque spiciness. Water, just a drop, lightens it a little, allowing the underlying sweetness to show. Not cask dominated, just bottled at exactly the right moment. Recommended. £68
      		
 
			
 
Light amber. The initial impression is one of bulk. There are heavy florals — think lilies and stewed white fruit, and just-overripe banana — but this is given a mysterious extra heft by an underpinning of a light meatiness, accompanied by a tiny lift of (good) sulfur. The palate is, unsurprisingly, thick and creamy with huge fruit that fills the mouth. A highly physical, old-style Speyside dram with classic distillery character. A statement whisky that is a must-try.
      		
 
			
 
Initially, the nose is very different than that of the younger Glen Deverons, with brown paper and malt vinegar. Becoming buttery, with coconut ice and citrus fruit. Ultimately, a caramel note reminiscent of the 16 year old (see below). Rich and waxy on the palate, with dark berry fruits, almonds, vanilla, and treacle. Sweet and sour. The medium-length finish offers green berries and a hint of aniseed. Real depth of flavor and individuality here. Exclusively available to travelers at World Duty Free Group stores in selected airports throughout the UK and Spain.   £250/700 ml
      		
 
			
 
Surprisingly lacking in oak intensity, given its age. Very creamy and soothingly sweet, with notes of honeyed vanilla, crème brûlée, sultana, orange creamsicle, peach cobbler, and a subtle array of tropical fruit. Soft and mellow on the finish. It’s very easy-drinking and should be enjoyable under most moods and circumstances.
      		
 
			
 
Amber. Very meaty, with a touch of cordite, then dark fruits, wet earth, and autumn woods, cut with spicy licorice and Darjeeling tea. Water brings down this exuberance, adding iris and whole grain bread. The palate has typical, full-on Mortlach brawny muscle, with chestnut honey-glazed venison. Water bringing out sweetness, but without ever losing that glowering core. Lovers of the old 16 year old apply here.
      		
 
			
 
An enticing blend of aged single malt and grain whiskies from silent stills, top-dressed with Port Ellen. The nose has soft fudge, rosehip, and honey lozenges, with a thread of peat sewn through it. A distinct smokiness hangs above the glass. A mouthful exudes lemon sherbet, honey-drizzled melon, and white chocolate, peaking with raspberry and mixed peel before a conclusion of banana-layered banoffee pie. An elegant finish of baked lemon and sweet oak. One for reflection. £350
      		
 
			
 
An American single malt whiskey that brings together the sensibilities of American craft with traditional Scottish and Irish styles with great result. Hogshead’s nose is bright and acidic, with pear, apple, maple, cinnamon, and malted grain. The palate is much spicier than expected, but enjoyably so, with black pepper, oak, cinnamon, and clove mixing well with honeyed malt and pear. The finish is long and slightly dry with a dash of heat. An impressive entry in the craft category.
      		
 
			
 
Much of Caol Ila’s malt goes into Johnnie Walker blends, so it’s a rare treat to see a cask strength offering. This release is Caol Ila on steroids, featuring a deeply smoky and meaty nose with bacon, campfire, leather, sea salt, and iodine. On the palate, the smoky fire continues to burn with intense smoke and salt combined with sweet honey malt.  An extremely long finish will have you exhaling smoke long after the dram is gone. (
)
      		
 
			
 
Holy Moly! Where do they find them? Over 40 years old and this seizes your attention with a becoming nose of smoked ham, sweet paprika, and red currant jelly. It’s extremely fruity with just the right level of tartness to keep it in balance; pomegranate, strawberry laces, crystalized fruits, and a nip of licorice adding to the richness and emerging creaminess before a dry finish of Victoria plums. Simply a gorgeous old grain. (
) £155
      		
 
			
 
Despite the vintage statement, this is 13 year old single pot still matured in first-fill bourbon. Apparently, it was MIA for eight years before being bottled. Peeled apples, crackerbread, Quaker oats, ripening pears, cappuccino sprinkles, and lightly toasted spices make for a well-composed and inviting prospect. Enveloping and oily with 
, fruit polos, allspice, and ground ginger. After a brief effervescent fizzle, it expands to become creamier and the spices carry on long after you have swallowed. €350
-> On page 65 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This Kickstarter-funded blend is a very savvy and seamless mix of 40% malt and 60% grain whiskies. Pale gold in color, the nose is inviting, with dried apricot, honey, tangerine, and salt. Everything from the nose comes together on the palate, which is soft and sweet with the right amount of oak and smoke to balance everything out. There's a dash of heat and a solid finish. Who'd ever expect such a smart and affable whisky to come from Kickstarter? (
)
      		
 
			
 
Created by distiller John Hall to celebrate his fifteen years of making whisky. It really is a whisky that defies categorizing. More body than most Canadian whiskies; softer and less aggressive than bourbon. When compared to Forty Creek Barrel Select (John’s standard whisky), it’s richer, more velvety, and sweeter on the nose and palate. Notes of toffee, silky caramel, mixed nuts, exotic spice, and a hint of marmalade. A soothing, almost rummy, very drinkable whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
A new direction for Forty Creek’s 8
 annual release, which was aged 3 years, redistilled, then aged another 9 years. Quintessentially Canadian, it begins with Caramac candy bar, finishing in white pepper and bitter grapefruit pith. Not as lush as past releases, although the flavors remain a tightly woven panoply of fruit, spices, vegetal notes, and citrus zest. Gooseberries and lime on the nose become black currants on the palate as increasing hints of red wine come to dominate.
      		
 
			
 
Finished in sherry casks, which contribute lush red berried fruit, strawberry/rhubarb crumb pie, and candied ginger on top of honeyed malt, vanilla wafer, nougat, and warming spice. Oily texture, with resinous oak on the finish. Good balance with plenty of character. After years of younger Knappogue releases, I’ve really been enjoying the more recent older bottlings like this one. (Allocated mostly to the U.S.) 
      		
 
			
 
Just as complex as Johnnie Walker Gold, but fuller and more richly textured. (Not surprising, given that there are no grain whiskies in Johnnie Walker Green.) This is one of the finer vatted malts on the market. Its flavors are well-integrated. You’ll find creamy toffee and nougat at its core, which is then layered with notes of vanilla, mint, fresh brine, and even a hint of mustard seed. Excitingly fresh and vibrant on the finish. A whisky for both the blend and single malt drinker. And at $55, it is also fairly valued for an all-malt whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Gold-amber color. Toffee, fruit, and a wisp of smoke underpin floral aromas. On the palate, flavors are nicely balanced and harmoniously interwoven. Gently sweet toffee notes up front gradually yield to drier notes on the finish, with soft, delicate fruit flavors throughout. 

      		
 
			
 
A “wheated” bourbon, meaning that it doesn’t have the spicy rye notes found in a more traditional “ryed” bourbon. A pleasantly sweet, easy-going, well-balanced experience. Creamy vanilla, caramel, candied corn, and ripe berried fruit , along with more subtle notes of glazed orange, cocoa powder, and wood shavings. If I were going to ease a new bourbon drinker into the category, I might pick this one. (Bottled for Binny’s Beverage Depot).

      		
 
			
 
Amber chestnut color. Mature aromas of oak, vanilla, toffee, and leather. A heavyweight bourbon with a huge flavor profile-oak, leather, and molasses, turning quite dry with a spicy, nutty finish that is very long and warming. 

      		
 
			
 
Richly textured -- almost chewy -- with toffee, molasses, nougat, date, candy corn, ripe clementine, and raisin, peppered with dusty grain, cocoa powder, moss, Play-Doh, subtle mint, and herbs. Not as crisp or clean on the palate as the Wild Turkey American Spirit 15 year old, released a couple years ago (which I rated a 94), but it is still very good and rather therapeutic in nature. It makes for a nice 
. This is a different style of Wild Turkey. There’s a good deal of wood influence. I suspect that some will like this a lot, while others might not warm up to it as much. It took a few encounters for me to embrace it.
      		
 
			
 
A marriage of 13 to 16 year old bourbons honoring master distiller Jimmy Russell’s 60 years at Wild Turkey. It is a more conservative Turkey compared to many of the previous limited-edition releases. But still, this is pleasant, with caramel and creamy vanilla intertwined with soft candied orange, cinnamon, polished oak, and a hint of evergreen. Nicely balanced, very approachable, but I would have preferred this at their signature 101 proof for added intensity.
-> On page 66 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Keeping in the Weller tradition, this one is a wheated bourbon. Some wheated bourbons, although easy to drink, can taste a bit too sweet without the spicy rye notes in there. The better ones are often aged a little longer and/or bottled at higher strengths, where the wood and alcohol accompany the sweetness. You’ll find soothingly rich toffee, caramel fudge, dates, and nougat brightened up by berried fruit, and a hint of dusty corn. Gently sweet finish. 

      		
 
			
 
A surprising amount of sweetness to balance the wood spice. Notes of pencil shavings, glazed fruit, candy corn, vanilla fudge, and bold polished leather on the finish.
      		
 
			
 
More caramelized sugars (caramel and toffee), with darker fruit than the 105 and 90. More oak spice influence too, but balanced nicely by the sweeter notes. Mouth-coating, viscous, and lubricating in texture. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Amber chestnut color. Rich, sweet aromas of toffee, maple syrup, soft candied fruit, and molasses, balanced by an oaky dryness and subtle spice notes. Thicker and fuller in body than previous vintages, with a somewhat silky texture. On the palate, the whiskey begins smooth and sweet, with notes of maple syrup, toffee, and soft ripe fruit, gradually increasing in intensity as spice (vanilla, subtle mint) and oak notes kick in. Lengthy finish. 

      		
 
			
 
This is an elegant whiskey with lots of finesse. Its primary flavors are vanilla, mint, and candied fruit. A touch of honey, light toffee, slight nuttiness, and rum notes round out the palate. Very clean, with a pleasingly dry finish. And nicely rounded too! Each year’s vintage is slightly different. Some have been quite rich and full in texture. This one is more subtle and teasing-and it’s one of the better ones. 

      		
 
			
 
While last year’s vintage was a more delicate expression of Evan Williams, I loved it for its elegance, charm, and balance (and gave it a 95 rating). This one is darker in flavor and bolder, with more caramelized sugars (caramel, toffee, maple syrup) along with some underlying fruit. It’s also drier, spicier, and with more wood influence (resin and polished leather). It still maintains its balance on the nose and majority of the palate, but with more wood on the finish than I would prefer to rate it in the 90s. (One more thing to consider: it’s a single barrel bottling and no two barrels are alike.)(Value Pick)
      		
 
			
 
Very straightforward and unassuming. Its greatest assets are its balance and drinkability, rather than its flavors. Lovely sweet notes (caramel, vanilla), orchard fruit, golden raisin, and spice (cinnamon, nutmeg, dusting of cocoa), leading to a smooth finish. Not the most distinctive or complex of the single barrel releases, but just a joy to drink. In fact, this is almost too drinkable. It’s a whiskey I feel would show better at a higher strength (say, 45% or even 50%).
      		
 
			
 
Silky in texture and gently sweet. This new “Mariage Collection” release shows a softer, more elegant side of Four Roses when compared to their other bottlings (including the most recent limited edition 120
 Anniversary bottling, which was a much bolder affair). Notes of candied fruit, black raspberry, blueberry, creamy vanilla, cornbread, and chamomile tea. Delicately spicy too, with a polished oak finish. Clean on the palate and very drinkable. Four Roses utilizes a wide variety of mash bills and yeast strains, and has the ability to produce a diverse array of whiskeys. This “Mariage” offering is a good example.

      		
 
			
 
The replacement to Four Roses “Mariage” limited editions, which were a marriage of two different whiskey formulas. This new whiskey contains three of Four Roses’ ten different recipes. It tastes older and more mature than the standard Small Batch bottling—there’s a lot more oak dryness and spice, especially on the finish. Along with the oak, there’s plenty of fruit, too (citrus, pineapple, apricot, papaya), plus caramel-coated nuts, a kiss of honeyed vanilla, and complex dried spice (cocoa, nutmeg, cinnamon) kicking in on the finish. (Available September, 2010.) 
      		
 
			
 
The most brooding of the three. Not as polished as the Barrel Select, but certainly very entertaining. Shows more depth that the No. 8, with more dry oak intensity and more heft. Notes of dried spices, dark chocolate, cocoa, and charcoal balance the citrus, currant, caramel, and vanilla. A very good sipping whisky for under $20. 

-> On page 67 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The oldest of the four in years, and also the highest in alcohol. It has managed to maintain its balance of flavors and keep the oak notes from becoming too dominant. Bolder and more masculine than Rowan’s Creek, but not as teasing or seductive. Still, it’s a great effort. 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Bourbon Color: Honey gold Aroma: Subtle. Clean. Delicately spicy, with notes of vanilla, mint, citrus, and golden raisin. Palate: Like its aroma, with a pot pourri of spices on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Heaven Hill’s straight wheat whiskey, Bernheim Original, is a pleasant drink, but I always felt that some extra aging and a higher proof would give it additional richness and complexity to propel it to a higher level. That’s what this new expression accomplishes. Soothing, gentle layers of caramel-coated nuts, vanilla fudge, coconut cream, maple syrup, and marzipan, with a sprinkle of cinnamon and cocoa. So easy to embrace. Nicely done.
      		
 
			
 
Matured in a bourbon hogshead. Floral nose. Soft, creamy, and elegant, with honeyed malt, custard, subtle butterscotch, and delicate fruit (orange, peach) peppered with spice (powdered vanilla, nutmeg). Well-balanced, gently dry, and easy drinking. A charming whisky (for a lazy Sunday afternoon, perhaps?)
      		
 
			
 
Identifiably richer, fuller, and smokier on the nose when compared to other young Ardbegs. While still prominent, there’s slightly less brine and seaweed, more earthiness, tar, soot, espresso, tobacco, grass, and chocolate fudge. The same goes for the palate. It starts out like a “slightly more gutsy than normal” cask strength, young Ardbeg (e.g., Renaissance) and, if you go into this experience expecting to be totally blown away by peat, tar, and smoke, you might feel a bit under-challenged initially. But the peat eventually builds to a powerful, lava-like crescendo and you realize that this is no ordinary Ardbeg. The length of the finish is seemingly endless; bold and warming. Through all this, there’s a soft underbelly of ripe barley and a vanilla sweetness to balance at least some of the tar, heat, and smoke -- something I admire in many Ardbegs.

Bottom line: It’s an interesting, entertaining, and eye-opening experience. I like how mature it tastes for a relatively young whisky. But, like a whisky that shows just a bit too much sherry or oak, I think the extra peat, to a degree, masks the subtle complexities I admire in some other, lesser-peated Ardbegs, which is the only thing keeping me from scoring this whisky in the 90s. All smoky whisky enthusiasts should endeavor to try this at least once.
      		
 
			
 
Deep gold color. Very bold aroma of toffee, dark chocolate, diesel fuel-soaked soil, smoldering campfire, coal tar, clove, leather, fig, and dark berried fruit. More of the same on the palate, with seaweed, smoked haddock, and cough drops emerging towards the finish. This whisky is very dynamic and exciting to drink. My only criticism: it comes across a little green on the finish, which keeps me from scoring it in the 90s. Still, it’s pretty impressive considering how young some of the whiskies in it are. If you like your Islay whiskies young and brooding, this one’s for you.
      		
 
			
 
Let it be known that from now on, June 2nd will be Ardbeg Day. That’s fine by me, as annually we can enjoy delights such as this bold expression that belts you in the nose with coal tar and soot before bay rum emerges, lightening slightly into lime and hot green bracken. The palate is oily, sweet, and very deep. A growly bugger that lurches toward the shore and then spins back to the laurel bushes inland. 13,000 bottles.	
      		
 
			
 
A touch of damp dunnage, some Ardbeggian soot, and plenty of jalapeño-style heat. Shows maturity and depth of character, with just-dead bonfire, ointment, and a sweetness, which here is like honeycomb. Water makes it bolder, with deeper smoke, while the palate has sweet wood, balanced (cigar-accented) smoke, and layers of salt, angelica, and plum. £90/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
Not an unpeated Ardbeg, but a new initiative to raise money for the Kildalton Project which supports community projects in south Islay. Smoke, but also real sweetness: hothouse peaches, mezcal, smoked oyster, sphagnum moss, a huge hit of vetiver, and coal tar. The smoke flies to the throat before fogging forward, while the sweet core (with added raspberry and cream, and mint) moves to the back. A worthwhile dram and a hugely worthwhile cause. Buy for either reason; or both. £120
      		
 
			
 
If I had to back one of the protagonists in Douglas Laing’s latest Duel of the Phial, my money would be squarely on the Ardbeg. The nose delights with oils oozing from the chestnut flesh of a grilled kipper, coiled rope on a trawler’s deck, and hot pressed asphalt, with a gentle background note of roasted peanut and millionaire’s shortbread. Medium texture: lemon and butterscotch, delicious fruitiness, and spearmint on the mid-palate. Clean, creamy with a baked lemon finish. £49
-> On page 68 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Chapter II of Arran’s The Devil’s Punch Bowl embraces whisky from a total of 27 casks. These are seventeen 
 sherry hogsheads (from 1997 and ’98), six standard bourbon barrels (2002), and four peated bourbon casks (2004). Juicy dark berries, malt, and soft cinnamon on the nose. Robust and fruity on the palate, with more dark berries, plain chocolate, a suggestion of vanilla, and black pepper. Long and drying in the earthy, mildly smoky finish, with aniseed and licorice.
      		
 
			
 
The Millennium Casks is a non-chill filtered vatting of 45 Arran casks filled on December 31, 1999 and January 1, 2000; 35 bourbon barrels and 10 sherry hogsheads. A spicy, floral nose with sherry, honey, coconut ice, orange, fudge, and ultimately raisin notes. Smooth and luscious on the palate, with apple pie and custard, plus a sprinkling of cinnamon. Long and spicy in the finish, with oranges, a hint of black pepper, licorice, and drying oak. 
£65
      		
 
			
 
As Arran continues on its trajectory toward introducing an 18 year old expression, just 9,000 bottles of sherry cask-matured 17 year old have been released. Bottled at 46%, it has not been chill filtered. Sweet and fruity on the nose, with ripe pineapples, green apples, malt, and a hint of licorice. Luscious and nicely-textured on the palate. Lots of orchard fruits, sherry, and soft toffee. Mild spice and hedgerow fruitiness in the slightly drying, lengthy finish.
      		
 
			
 
The third and final expression in Arran’s Devil’s Punchbowl trilogy of limited releases is a multi-age bottling, matured in eight 
 sherry butts, eight French oak 
, and five bourbon barrels. Only 6,660 bottles are available. Figs, dates, citrus fruits, and honey on the nose, with developing savory notes. Silky sherry, lively cinnamon, and red berries on the palate, with a hint of wood smoke. Lengthy in the finish, with spicy oak.
      		
 
			
 
The latest release in Auchentoshan’s 1970s Vintage Series is this expression, distilled on October 22, 1979 and matured in first-fill oloroso sherry butts for 32 years. Just 1,000 bottles are available (12 bottles for the U.S.). Sweet on the nose, with furniture polish, digestive biscuits, cinnamon, and a faint whiff of old leather. Big tropical fruit notes open the palate, soon turning to smoky blackcurrants, tea, and rich fruit loaf. The finish is spicy, featuring black pepper, tobacco, dark berries, and plain chocolate.  
      		
 
			
 
The 2000 vintage of Balblair is intended to replace the well-regarded 1997 variant. Matured in first-fill American oak, this very drinkable expression represents good value for the money. A pretty peach and pineapple nose, with coconut and honeyed vanilla. Toasted marshmallows with time. Relatively light-bodied, sweet, with lively spice, ginger, and youthful oak on the relatively complex palate. Fudge in the finish, and a contrasting hint of dark chocolate at the last.
      		
 
			
 
This veteran Balblair was distilled on February 7, 1969 using barley malted on site and coal-fired stills. Just 999 bottles have been released. Opens with slight saltiness on the nose, almost ozone, then lemons and pine, and finally, vanilla fudge. Overt citrus notes on the palate, with aniseed, some oak, brittle toffee, and a smokiness not found in younger Balblairs. The finish is long and discreetly spicy, notably cinnamon and black pepper.
      		
 
			
 
A new addition to the permanent Balvenie range. Lovely bright gold color. Layers of sweetness (the characteristic Balvenie honey, along with vanilla fudge, nougat, and rich toffee) peppered with dried spice and a hint of tropical fruit (papaya, guava, tangerine). Nice viscosity with good grip on the finish. I really like the balance and complexity of this whisky. A very solid effort and the price is right.
      		
 
			
 
The follow-up and older sibling to "Curiositas." I’ve been pushing for Speyside distilleries to bump up the peating levels of their malt they use for a long time because a majority of the spirits are big enough to handle the peat smoke, and this whisky proves my point. The tarry, peat smoke and bacon-like notes are a delight, and they are balanced nicely by a honey and apple pie sweetness. Spanish olives in brine, dark chocolate, golden raisin, and subtle spice round out the palate nicely. Not a heavy whisky, but pretty powerful stuff for BenRiach. So nice of the previous owners of this distillery to experiment with higher peating levels decades ago. 

      		
 
			
 
A heavily peated BenRiach that has been finished in a tawny port pipe. The nose is akin to cherries, sloes, and blueberries soaked in alcohol. The peatiness manifests itself as a smoky herbal note and shows most on the palate, but is never too dominant. An oil of clove coolness takes control on the finish. Great balance and integration; a finish that genuinely works. £53 
-> On page 69 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Subtle elegance, creamy, and extremely drinkable. Mouthwatering fruity notes (lemon, lime, tangerine, passion fruit) marry well with notes of fresh-cut grass, vanilla, and honey. Very clean too and nicely balanced! When I drink a Lowland whisky this good, I am saddened by all of the Lowland distilleries that have gone silent over the past 25 years, knowing what we have lost. 

      		
 
			
 
Amber-gold color. Exotic tropical fruit aromas (citrus, melon, coconut), with interwoven notes of almonds, pear, honey, and subtle peat smoke. Light to medium in body, and very delicate in nature. On the palate, the whisky begins sweet (especially honey), followed by a basket of exotic fruit and nuts similar to its aroma, becoming drier and distantly smoky on the finish. 

   Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: approx. $1,500. Availability: only 40 bottles for the U.S. 

   This Bowmore Fino Cask, a whisky which has aged very well indeed, is the first of three limited edition 1964 vintage Bowmore whiskies to be released over the next year. The two to follow in 2003 have been aged in bourbon oak and oloros sherry casks.
      		
 
			
 
Copper color with shades of ruby. Intriguing aromas of sweet plum, grapes, citrus, peat smoke, seaweed, and brine. Full-bodied and somewhat viscous. Flavors of ripe fruit (plums, grapes, citrus), followed by a burst of more traditional Bowmore flavors (peat smoke, brine, seaweed), finishing with lingering notes of prunes, dates, baker’s chocolate, and licorice. 

   Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: Approx. $120. A limited release of 12,000 bottles, 1,200 of which are destined for the United States. 

   While there is no age statement, this whisky was aged for 12 years in bourbon barrels, followed by an additional 18 months in ruby port casks. I believe it is the first distillery bottling to marry port with the traditional flavors of an Islay whisky. Because of this, it is best to keep an open mind when trying this whisky, perhaps even having more than one go at it before rendering a verdict. I suspect the more you try Voyage, the more you will like.
      		
 
			
 
Amber with orange and ruby hues. Aromas of Islay peat smoke, wine fruit, and background floral and spice notes. Flavors reveal more of what the aroma suggests-peat smoke, fruit, and floral/spice notes-with a balancing oak and subtle sea salt and seaweed. The peat smoke particularly comes in on the finish, lest one forgets where Bowmore hails from. 

   Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: approx. $90. Availability: only 480 bottles for the entire United States, with the remainder of the 12,000 bottles going to Duty Free. 

   There is no age statement on the label, but this whisky has been aged for 12 years in traditional bourbon and sherry barrels, and then finished off for 18 months in Bordeaux (Claret) wine casks. The wine fruit certainly is evident and, like the Glenmorangie Claret Wood Finish offered a year or so ago, will appeal to those with an open mind and willingness to accept new flavors in whisky. Purists will say it detracts from the distillery's character. I believe it's the first smoky whisky that attempts to marry these flavors with claret fruitiness.
      		
 
			
 
Amber color. Aromas of peat smoke (but more subdued than many Bowmore whiskies in their teens), toasted oak, citrus fruit, vanilla, and a hint of the sea. Its flavors are similar, which express themselves in a very mature manner-oak flavors are more dominant than other components. Still, there is an emerging brine freshness that keeps the whisky from becoming tired and dull. Good, lengthy finish. 

Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: approx. $160. Availability: only 244 bottles total.
      		
 
			
 
Antique gold color. Aromas of peat smoke, damp earth, exotic pepper, vanilla, and fruit. Medium body. A great balance of flavors, with a lovely Islay character. The whisky begins sweet up front, ultimately turning pleasingly dry towards the finish. In between you'll enjoy flavors of peat smoke, vanilla, spicy pepper, and delicately honeyed malt, with just a hint of the sea. 

   Style: Islay single malt scotch. Price: $125. Available nationwide. 

   What I like most about this whisky is its impeccable balance-between youth and maturity, sweetness and dryness-with just the right amount of peat smoke to declare its Islay roots without smothering its other flavors.
      		
 
			
 
An excellent example of a younger Bruichladdich, and an interesting contrast to the Duncan Taylor expression reviewed above. Appetizing and very clean with a creamy texture. Honey and vanilla notes accentuate a fresh maltiness, with underlying marshmallow, grass and hay. The whisky finishes nicely rounded, pleasingly dry and salty, with a hint of seaweed. A great aperitif. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in a combination of sherry and bourbon oak. Bold and fresh, bursting with testosterone. Notes of damp kiln smoke, tar, wet sheep, roasted chestnuts, and pine forest bedding, along with more subtle pear, espresso, anise, and brine. Sweet notes of vanilla, fig cake, and maple syrup serve up balance and complexity. Appetizing brine and tar finish. It’s more mature than last year’s PC6. Earthier and less fruity, too! Plus, I feel that the sherry notes in PC7 integrate better than the Madeira notes from PC6. But my favorite is still the original PC5 for its purity, balance, maturity (for its age), and pristine character. (I lined up all three yesterday and tasted them side-by-side.)

      		
 
			
 
A mélange of casks and techniques that only Jim McEwan knows about. The fourth iteration of his Black Art manages to mix mature notes of beeswax-burnished church pews, a sprinkling of rose water, dried mango, rosehip syrup, and potpourri. The palate opens to Parma violets, underpinned with light lavender, where fleshiness mingles with the exotic notes of manuka honey, pomegranate, apricot pits, and dried lemon. It pushes malt into a new area, but that’s the point. £200
      		
 
			
 
Bere is an ancient strain of barley which is stubbornly difficult to grow and mash. For this, Bruichladdich has gone to a specialist farm on Orkney. The nose is intriguingly aromatic, sweet and slightly corn-like, with a sweet nuttiness behind. It becomes very floral (night-scented stocks) with white currant, lemon sherbet, and a lift of tangerine before water brings out 
 (cherry blossom) syrup and bread. The palate is very sweet and concentrated. Remarkable. Keep watching. £52
-> On page 70 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in 2002, here’s Port Charlotte with an assured maturity. Amber in color, with some smoke and a pleasing whiff of cowshed (sweet hay and cow’s breath), before rosehip syrup and ozonic freshness. Water brings out incense, cream, even a little nuttiness. The palate is gently complex; a drop of water is needed to calm the heat and reveal the smoke that interweaves between the layers. It retains its fresh acidic finish, with nutmeg, soft lemon, and pear. Excellent. £110
      		
 
			
 
There have been several lovely older expressions of Bunnahabhain over the past decade, and this is one of them. The vanilla cream and toffee nuttiness is balanced perfectly by polished oak, bright fruit (apricot, sultana, cherry pits), and subtle anise. There’s a calming quality to this whisky that is very more-ish. All the maturity of an older whisky without the tired, dominating oak.

      		
 
			
 
The new version, at a higher proof and not chill-filtered. That helped — especially on the palate — with greater texture and more well-defined flavors. But the flavors are essentially the same: nutty, toffee, light molasses, vanilla fudge, with delicate fruit (citrus, dark berries) and a hint of brine. Very comforting. Extra points for versatility — this whisky will accommodate many moods and situations. 
      		
 
			
 
Fresh and quite aromatic. Nice interplay between soothing malty sweetness and honest “naked” Caol Ila notes (in the sense that all the classic Caol Ila flavors are exposed-leafy smoke, tarry rope, salt & pepper spice, seaweed, and olive). An evolving whisky, with a phenolic, briny crescendo that lingers. Nicely done. 

      		
 
			
 
Pale gold color. Aromas and flavors of peat smoke, seaweed, lemon grass, olives, and green peppercorns. Medium bodied, and slightly oily in texture. Long, dry peat smoke finish.

   Style: Islay single malt scotch. Price: low $40s. Available nationwide. 

   Caol Ila is an Islay dram that Laphroaig, Lagavulin, and Bowmore fans must become acquainted with. Although distllery bottlings are not available here in the U.S., many independent bottlers offer it. This expression is young, vibrant, and exciting.
      		
 
			
 
Finished in cognac wood. The cognac wood influence might dominate other whiskies, but the Coal Ila is big enough for challenge. If anything, it seems to contribute a silky elegance to what would otherwise be a brooding, bare-knuckled whisky;. It works nicely. Notes of germinating barley, vanilla cream, grape preserve, and peat bonfire, with a salty, smoky finish. (Available in the Chicago area.) 

      		
 
			
 
Soft and gentle (for Caol Ila, that is), thanks to the 25 years of aging. Plenty of creamy vanilla and honey to go with the malty foundation, along with coal tar, licorice root, and olive, with a hint of brine, juniper, unsweetened dark chocolate, and tobacco (cigars in a humidor?). Very nice. (A Julio’s Liquors exclusive.)
      		
 
			
 
Funny to think how recently Caol Ila was an Islay giant that was kept pretty much under wraps by its owner. These days it has cemented its reputation as the island’s Mr. Consistent. This version shows its character the best, a nose that mixes seashore and grass with a distinct hint of smoked bacon. The peatiness isn’t dominant, but flows throughout the palate, scenting, lifting, and subtly changing the mix. A delicious oiliness makes it a great food whisky.
      		
 
			
 
Caol Ila in unpeated guise. There’s no age statement, but what you get is a mix of the fresh and the mature: a vibrant attack with fresh Victoria plum, grapes, and a hint of oiliness. Give it time and the sensation is like afternoon tea at your auntie’s, with thickly-buttered scones dripping with honey or pineapple jam. The palate is equally sweet and gentle, and only needs a little drop of water to reveal light spice. A wee beauty.
      		
 
			
 
Cragganmore is a deep malt but its richness is often obscured by its fruity sweetness. A period in port pipes allows this element to be amplified. The black currant is now fully fruited and acts as a flavor bridge while the meatiness that sits underneath and often unseen is revealed. Think cherry pipe tobacco, clove, and dark fruits. Sweet, but not too sweet, and always identifiably Cragganmore. For me, the pick of the bunch.
-> On page 71 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Gold color. Aromas of citrus fruit (lemons, tangerines) and a pot pourri of spices-very fragrant. Appetizing flavors of citrus fruit, exotic spices, along with a slightly briny, peppery finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Primary maturation took place in an ex-bourbon cask, then from 2006 in a cask sourced from the vineyard of Chateau Haut Marbuzet, previously used to hold Cabernet Sauvignon. A final three years were spent in a newly-emptied bourbon barrel. Gingerbread, summer berries, and fig rolls on the nose. Fudge and vanilla. Black cherries, raisins, lots of lively spice, and a red wine ‘edge’ in the mouth. Freshly-baked ginger cake in the long, spicy finish. Cask number 10; 223 bottles. 
      		
 
			
 
After initial maturation in American white oak, this 1991 expression was filled into a 15 year old Lepanto brandy cask from Gonzales Byass in May 2003, ultimately being re-racked into a fresh ‘distillery run’ bourbon barrel in August 2009. Caramel and white chocolate on the nose, malt, fudge, cinnamon, and nutmeg, then burnt treacle and hot brandy. Malt, sweet spice, almonds, bananas, and fudge on the palate. Spicy fruits in the lengthy Armagnac-like finish. Cask number 1; 233 bottles. 
      		
 
			
 
Mahogany color. Full-bodied, thick and chewy. Incredibly rich aroma and flavors of toffee, fudge, spice cake, ripe fruit, burnished leather, and oak. Nicely balanced throughout, with a long, satisfying finish. 

      		
 
			
 
The nose offers tinned peaches, fresh ginger, and a slightly herbal note. The palate is voluptuous, with vanilla, malt, vigorous spices, and white chocolate. Lingering coffee and gingery oak in the finish. 
      		
 
			
 
Soothing vanilla cream, with additional notes of spice cake, coconut marshmallow, tiramisu, fresh cut grass, and a hint of evergreen. A true "comfort" whisky. Just don’t add any water, because it will fall flat. This whisky is great just the way it is. 

      		
 
			
 
The oldest whisky ever bottled by Glenfarclas. Fortunately, Glenfarclas ages very nicely. This whisky proves my point. It is very complex, with notes of burnished leather, roasted nuts, fruit cake, toffee apples, sultana, damp peat, and sappy oak. A very soothing whisky, with the depth and maturity one hopes for in a whisky this old. Only 110 bottles produced and only 18 destined for the U.S. 

      		
 
			
 
Amber in color and again some fresh fruitiness, this time mixed with a little cereal. The same dry grass you get on the 1981, but here there’s a nutty, biscuity edge above that meaty solidity. The palate shows slight oiliness and roasted red pepper, that changes into blackberry as it opens. Needs roughly the same amount of water to open fully, which also brings out chamois leather and then barley sugar sweets. Clean but rich — that’s Glenfarclas. (A U.S. exclusive.)
      		
 
			
 
Although from a refill, the mahogany color suggests a short previous use. Some nose burn, with a mature edge of leather and dark chocolate. Here’s Glenfarclas in a darker guise, with raisin and a savory aspect; think roast pheasant and walnuts, lamb and mint sauce. The palate is big, thick, and sweet with lots of extract, but also Turkish delight, sultana, and prune. While sherried, it’s not in any way overcooked; the tannins are balanced, the sweetness massive. £625
      		
 
			
 
Soothing and seamless on the nose and palate with chewy toffee, molasses, nougat, almond butter, vanilla fudge, cinnamon spice, and nutmeg, along with gentle tobacco notes emerging later on the palate. A pleasing dry finish offsets the sweeter notes. A delicious whisky from beginning to end. 

-> On page 72 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
A vatting of different ages of Glenfiddich (the youngest being 14 years old) aged in American oak, then married in virgin American oak casks on which folk from the States had written their hopes and dreams…Awww! Deliciously fruity and clean, it’s all pear juice, crème brûlée, fudge, cool mint, and dessert apple. With water, there’s dusty cinnamon, kiwi, and milk chocolate. The oak acts as a smoothing base for this fruitiness. A lovely idea and a lovely whisky. 
      		
 
			
 
Amber gold color. Surprisingly smoky aroma balanced nicely with mature oak notes, roasted nuts, tobacco, and malty sweetness in the background. Firm body. Delicious flavors of toasted oak, roasted nuts, smoke, leather, and malt. The flavors are interwoven nicely with great balance. Satisfying finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Distilled at Glen Garioch when peated barley was still being used, this 1991 vintage is quite reticent on the nose, considering its strength. Subtle malt and fudge notes, plus a hint of wood smoke. Fresh fruits and a sherbet ‘zing’ on the palate, with a suggestion of treacle. Developing spicy smokiness. Fruitiness is emphasized when water is added. The ‘zing’ — now ginger — lasts to the end of the medium-length finish, with advancing, discreet oak. (Only 120 bottles for the U.S.) 
      		
 
			
 
A lovely example of what not chill-filtering can do for a whisky. Meticulous cask selection also helps play a part here. Very straightforward on the surface (no surprises), but with vibrant, well-defined flavors and a comforting creamy texture on the palate. Bright fruit defines this whisky (lime, kiwi, ripe melon, sultana, fresh peach), accompanied by honeyed malt, heather, and a hint of spice and smoke. A fun whisky, suitable for many moods and occasions. (A Park Avenue Liquor exclusive.) 
      		
 
			
 
This limited edition release of Glen Garioch is the first from the Aberdeenshire distillery to have been matured entirely in 
 sherry casks. Just 1,000 cases of the 14 year old expression are available globally. Old leather, slightly earthy, sultanas, white pepper, and a hint of lemon pith on the nose. The palate is big and bold, with more pepper, plus cinnamon caramel, orange, and abundant sherry. Enduring spice, licorice, and slightly smoky raisins in the finish.
      		
 
			
 
The Massandra winery, which supplies casks for Glenglassaugh’s Massandra Connection bottlings, is the oldest in Crimea, and reputedly produced Tsar Alexander III’s favorite wines. The 1973 distillation, which has been finished in sherry casks, has a nose of sultanas, cinnamon, sweet grass, and herbal notes in the background. Bung cloth, char, and finally damp undergrowth. Complex aromatic progression. Mouth-coating, with sweet, spicy tropical fruit notes and 
. Slowly drying, with bitter orange and mild tannins at the close. £645
      		
 
			
 
This 26 year old single cask Glengoyne was matured in a first-fill European oak sherry butt that yielded 339 bottles. It offers a nose of sultanas, figs, and vanilla, plus white pepper and a hint of linseed. Succulent in the mouth, the palate yields sweet sherry, honey, and contrasting lemon juice and pepper. The finish is lengthy, but dries rapidly, with lively pepper, oak tannins, and a final fatty note. £350
      		
 
			
 
If Cragganmore is sometimes overlooked, then what of this poor Lowlander whose qualities are consistently overlooked? Again, here we have a pale color suggesting use of refill casks, but whereas Cragganmore was reticent to the point of being mute, this is expressive and lively. 
The nose, with intense floral notes of lilac blossom, freesia, and chamomile, is a revelation. These are backed with a thick, unsalted butter note that suggests that the cask might not have been as quiet as first imagined. Give it time, and out come boiled sweets and a fresh green note, like a just-whittled stick. A hint of wheat chaff and fragrant grasses brings to mind lying in a summer meadow watching the dust motes dance in the sunshine. 
The mouth is sweet and lemon-accented with a pickup of a pleasant chalkiness on the nose that gives it the suggestion of a fino sherry or Vin Jaune. I like its energy, and feel that the addition of water reduces its vibrancy, so for drinking purposes I’d have a glass of ice cold water on the side. All in all impressive, with just a hint of soap on the finish taking it below the 90 mark. 
      		
 
			
 
Style: Speyside single malt scotch Color: Amber Aroma: Rich and rather full for Glenlivet, with nuts and fruit, drenched with layers of toffee and caramel. Palate: Rich and enveloping-almost chewy-with notes of toffee and caramel up front. Delicate fruit, nuts and spice emerge mid-palate, adding complexity, becoming dry with a long spicy finish 

      		
 
			
 
Very stylish. Quite refined too, with notes of vanilla, peaches and flowering currant. The whisky is very soft on the palate, delicate and almost bashful at times. Indeed, it may take a couple of dates with this whisky for it to fully to reveal itself. The whisky finishes toasty, with a pleasing cereal grain maltiness. Some whiskies are great after dinner; others make wonderful pre-dinner drams. This one is great anytime. 

-> On page 73 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
New packaging and new whisky too-sort of. According to Glenlivet’s whisky maker Jim Cryle, Archive is now being bottled in smaller batches, allowing them to be more selective in the casks used to improve its quality and flavor. I believe that it has worked. It tastes more refined. Along with Archive’s signature creamy toffee notes, I’m picking up beautiful floral, vanilla, and fruity notes (peaches, pineapple, coconut) on the nose and palate, with subtler nutty, anise threads throughout. An elegant expression of Glenlivet. 

      		
 
			
 
Lovely bouquet of dried citrus fruit, honeyed apricot and plum, complemented by exotic wood spice, malty vanilla, and a hint of mint and anise. Similar follow-through on the palate, with the sweeter notes up front, full fruit impact mid-palate, leading to a dry, peppery, exotic wood spice finish. The whisky evolves on the palate and is very impressive, with its only blemish being a bit too dry and oaky on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
This whisky fits the profile of other extra-matured Glenlivet whiskies I’ve tasted. Notes of coconut and other assorted tropical fruit, old rum, caramel custard, shortbread cookies, vanilla malt, and a hint of cotton candy. This is all balanced by polished oak. A soothing, rather sweet whisky (which is quite surprising for its age).
      		
 
			
 
For those of you drinking whisky long enough, it was a Glenmorangie Tain L’Hermitage 1978 Vintage that kick-started this whole exotic finish trend by Glenmorangie about 10 years ago. That one wasn’t sold here in the U.S., but this one is (although this one costs about four times as much as the original one did when it was released). Both were racked in used bourbon barrels before being finished in Hermitage red wine casks from northern Rhone. The best of these limited release Glenmorangies, like the Fino Sherry Finish expression several years ago, add complexity and intrigue without masking Glenmorangie’s lovely subtle complexity. This one does a pretty good job of it, although there’s a lot of fruit here (an obvious contribution of the wine). Complex fruit, with notes of plum, raspberry, nectarine, blueberries, and a hint of lemon. Underneath the fruit, there’s nougat, dark chocolate and cocoa. Towards the finish, the whisky becomes nicely dry with oak lingering on the palate. 

      		
 
			
 
When compared to the 10 year old, this one’s richer, with darker fruit and more caramelized sweet notes, paired with accentuated dried wood spice, while the 10 year old is more vibrant and floral. Like the 10 year old, there’s good balance here.

      		
 
			
 
Finished (extra-matured, as they are now saying) in Sauternes casks. This expression replaces the Madeira wood finish. Beautiful sweet notes of honeycomb, sultana, apple pie, and white chocolate balanced by peach, coconut, and pineapple. Gentle background spice. The Sauternes cask adds extra weight and viscosity. The sweetness is not cloying, nor does it dominate the flavor profile. A good demonstration of the benefits of wood finishing. 

      		
 
			
 
It's nice to see Gordon & MacPhail bottlings at strengths higher than 40%, and it makes this already hefty whisky even more so. It is fragrant (with subtle heather notes), rich and malty (and quite thick in texture), with notes of honey and vanilla. Interwoven fruit (sultana, along with subtle lemon and orange) add complexity. All this sweetness is rounded out nicely with a long, dry, oaky/spicy finish. A delicious, evolving whisky. (Bottled exclusively for Binny's Beverage Depot.)
      		
 
			
 
Interestingly, this whisky was bottled in 2005, but not released until the end of 2008. (The brand manager tells me that they wanted to wait until the stocks of the current 1980s vintage (a 1987) were depleted. It’s fresh, lively, and uncluttered, glowing with bright fruit (mandarin orange, nectarine), lemon meringue pie, and a creamy vanilla sweetness that coats the palate. A gently dry oak finish with subtle anise and very dark chocolate. A perky Glenrothes, and a lot of fun to drink. 

      		
 
			
 
A belated addition to Diageo’s Special Releases range for 2011, this offering is from the now-demolished distillery in Stonehaven, which closed in 1985. Just 1,500 bottles are available, and maturation has taken place in American oak refill casks filled in 1970. Resin, malt, nutmeg, and wood polish on the nose, with developing vanilla and brittle toffee. Full in the mouth, slightly oily, and notably fruity, with heather and cinnamon notes. Pepper and bitter orange in the long finish. £525
      		
 
			
 
Bright gold color. Soft aromas and flavors of delicate honey, heather, subtle spice, tropical fruit, creamy vanilla, and malt. Nicely balanced throughout the palate and very clean-this whisky was aged in an excellent cask. There are no off flavor notes from the wood at all, nor is it too woody on the finish. Rather, it finishes soft, gentle, and clean. 

-> On page 74 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Clean and fragrant on the nose, with aromas of dried heather, germinating barley, and white chocolate. Soft, sweet malt along with honeycomb, crème brulee, and a hint of fruit puree. The palate is soothingly malty, delivering what the aroma promised (first the sweet notes, then dried heather and spice), with a dry, polished oak finish. The extra aging adds depth, and the cask was obviously a good one, with no hint of being tired or old. 

      		
 
			
 
Yellow gold color. Fresh, floral aromas (reminiscent of a spring garden), creamy vanilla, honey, heather, subtle fruit, and a hint of toasted oak. Elegant and nicely balanced. Medium in body, but richly so. Richly flavored, too, and nicely balanced, with notes that echo the aromas. In fact, this is one of the most balanced whiskies I've had in quite a while. A hint of salt, spice, and seaweed on the finish linger on indefinitely.
  Style: Highland (Orkney) single malt Scotch whisky. Price: $150. Limited to 600 bottles. 

  This whisky is a pure joy to drink and demonstrates why Highland Park is so highly regarded. The fact that it was aged in a bourbon cask allows this whisky's more subtle notes to be fully appreciated. Quite delicious!
      		
 
			
 
This is a recent addition to the portfolio, and has been matured in a mixture of thirteen American oak butts and hogsheads. These have given an out-turn of 893 bottles. Freshly-grated ginger, white pepper, and melons on the nose. Soft fruit and spices feature on the palate, with honey and coconut oil, plus background peat smoke. Lively spices, soft oak, and hazelnuts in the finish.
      		
 
			
 
Many of the independent  H.P. bottlings are aged in bourbon casks, and, like this one, exhibit creamy vanilla, honeyed malt, and citrus. I’m also picking up some more subtle heather, brine, coconut, and nougat. This one is clean on the palate and shows nice balance, with enough dry oak on the finish to counter the whisky’s sweeter notes. (A D&M Wines & Liquors exclusive.) 
      		
 
			
 
More obviously sherried on the nose than either Sigurd or Ragnvald; buttery, with figs, sultanas, vanilla, a hint of leather, and ripe oranges. Rich and silky on the complex palate; overt sherry, ginger, and lots of old leather and sweet smoke. Spice is quite muted here. The finish is lengthy, with plain chocolate, wood smoke, figs, and tingling spices. Luxurious and accomplished. (
€1,000
      		
 
			
 
The latest addition to the Jura range has been matured in American white oak casks before spending three years in Gonzalez Byass oloroso sherry butts. The mellow nose is lightly oily, with figs, sherry, orange, and a savory note. Vanilla emerges, along with malt, and finally a hint of cinnamon and parma violets. Soft and supple on the palate, with more orange, plus cocoa, sultanas, and dates. The finish is lengthy and features dark chocolate, raisins, aniseed, and subtle spices. 
      		
 
			
 
A thick, sweet, weighty Lagavulin -- the kind you eat with a fork. Interwoven caramel and molasses laced with thumping waxed fruit, dates, burnt walnuts, and peat kiln embers that linger long on the palate. A mouthful!
      		
 
			
 
White wine color. Seaweed, briny aromas and flavors. The classic Laphroaig medicinal, pungent, smoky rush kicks in on the finish and stays in overdrive for a very long time. 

      		
 
			
 
This whisky shows no signs of immaturity considering its age. Indeed, enjoying Laphroaig young and at a higher strength is the best way to appreciate the distillery’s true character. Very medicinal and “closed up” neat, but comes alive with a splash of water. Powerful notes of tar, charcoal, smoked seaweed, and licorice root, mercifully tamed by ripe barley and honeyed malt laced with vanilla. Warm, smoky, charred oak finish. 
      		
 
			
 
A very tarry start, like fence posts which have just been treated with creosote. Add in some smoked fish alongside dried grass, and you have all the requisite elements for a classic Laphroaig. The palate is massively smoky to start, a real peat bomb, but that eruption recedes, allowing barley and sweetness to come through. This is a serious dram which needs water to coat the tongue. Very good. £65/500 ml
-> On page 75 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Bold, with smoked fish (Arbroath smokies), dried fruits. Has requisite density of character with classic notes of freshly-laid tarmac and medicine. A lemon edge adds some lift. The complexity continues on the tongue, which is very juicy; vanilla-accented but with plenty of seaweed-like smoke that shifts into licorice. Long, balanced, and thick in the center, with some (smoked) dried thyme on the finish. £70/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
From a Speyside distillery whose malt is more commonly found in blends. An enticing and complex nose balances sweet honey, acidic dried orange, rich walnut, and light smoke. On the palate these elements come together well with complexity and balance. Things get spicy in the mid-palate, with black pepper, salt, ginger, and a bump in smoke. A long finish rounds everything off, showcasing smoke and orange. Lots of character and flavor for an uncommon malt. (
)
      		
 
			
 
Longmorn is now being bottled one year older. Whisky companies seem to be discontinuing odd-year whiskies. Bowmore recently extended their 17 year old to 18. Ironically, in both instances, the older whiskies serve up more sherry and fruit. Both the Longmorn 15 and Bowmore 17 were considered benchmark whiskies, so these changes weren’t without risk. Still, in both instances, the new expressions won’t disappoint. This new Longmorn shows a mouth-coating maltiness -- Longmorn’s signature characteristic. Along with this, there’s ripe barley, honeyed fruit (peach, with subtle sultana and pineapple), gently complex nuts (almonds, brazil nuts), and a hint of chocolate-covered coconut. A lush, fruity-sweet dram that lingers long on the palate. True Longmorn devotees will still want to purchase a bottle of the 15 year old while they can.
      		
 
			
 
Longmorn may be slightly better known, but it’s still pretty much a cult whisky — with a huge following in Japan, where every whisky bar seems to have multiple expressions. This bottling shows it in its lushest guise, with masses of caramelized soft fruits, banana, cream toffee, and chocolate. The palate shifts between raisin and plum. Elegant. 
      		
 
			
 
Immediately identifiably Longmorn: that ridiculous, highly amenable mix of soft fruits, masses of sweet spice, candied peels, coconut, and sticky toffee pudding. In fact, it’s almost over the top in its lushness. Leans into the mouth with masses of mace, then soft fruits and marzipan develop. Unctuous, long, and ripe, the wood shows just a little, but the depth and richness holds it in check. Very good. £97
      		
 
			
 
Deep gold color. Fragrant, floral aroma, with a potpourri of dried spices, especially vanilla and nutmeg. Creamy texture. Flavors of creamy vanilla and caramel, becoming dry with subtle spices and just a hint of fruit. 

      		
 
			
 
Even drier and expressing more of the complex floral and spice notes found in the 15 year old. However, by the time the whisky reaches mid-palate, the dried fruits, dried spices, and general wood notes become prominent, preventing the whisky from revealing other sides of its usually multi-faceted personality. It’s still a very fine whisky, but not as good as the 15, regardless of price. 

      		
 
			
 
Initially, this is Macallan in effusive Willy Wonka mood, with lots of toffee, chocolate, greengage, and light oiliness. The aroma thickens with water, and with it a more serious mien: brogues buffed to a high sheen. The palate is equally rich and layered, with cereal, black cherry, discreet oak. A complex mix, as befits a gentleman’s dram that every gentleman should have. £95
      		
 
			
 
Toffee and nougat, with a lacing of cotton candy. It then turns richly nutty-almost chewy-with notes of dried apricot, sultana, and a touch of red currant. Firm, dry, oak resin finish. A well-structured whisky, indicative of the Mortlach pedigree. 

      		
 
			
 
Immediately identifiable as Mortlach, with a pleasant, feral mélange of meat mingled with milk chocolate and gorse. There is elegant sweetness here, but expressed as a mix of the bittersweet caramelized juices stuck to the bottom of a roasting pan, with honey. The palate, unsurprisingly, is big, and medium dry, but here as well there’s some sweetness in the form of black fruits. Mortlach, but in a slightly subtler guise than usual. £60
-> On page 76 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Finished in sauternes wood. I really love how the appetizing notes of Pulteney marry with the sweet notes of the sauternes wine cask. Light-medium in body, but good viscosity. Fresh brine throughout, with honey-drenched melon fruit, pineapple in syrup, citrus, and a hint of cotton candy and lightly toasted marshmallow. A delicious marriage of two high-caliber drinks categories.

      		
 
			
 
WK209 is named after a steam herring drifter registered in the Caithness port of Wick, where Old Pulteney is distilled. This limited edition, travel retail exclusive was matured entirely in first fill European oak sherry casks for 8 to 10 years. Milk chocolate, crème brûlée, old leather, and sherry on the nose, contrasting with brine. Sherry, dried fruits, black pepper, English mustard, and sea salt on the full palate. Spicy sherry, heather, and black coffee in the luxurious finish. €50
      		
 
			
 
One of the last remaining vintages from an Islay distillery which will be missed dearly. This is obviously from a sherry cask, and the peat smoke, sherry, and oak-aging is married nicely here. It a brooding Port Ellen. Notes of peat fires, fig, kippers, toffee, vanilla, and dry oak take turns entertaining the palate. Considering its age, it isn’t excessively oaked, and the Port Ellen character still shines through. If you’re going to track down a bottle of Port Ellen before they get really difficult to find, this one is worth serious consideration. 

      		
 
			
 
An elder Port Ellen, but still showing plenty of Port Ellen character. It’s chock full of kiln smoke, damp forest, seaweed, charcoal, brine, and tar. Additional notes of licorice root, kalamata olive, cinnamon, and black pepper, with teasing citrus emerging occasionally. Warming, tarry, dry smoke finish. An old-fashioned, pungent Islay whisky.

      		
 
			
 
This, the fifth of TWE’s ongoing Elements bottlings of Islay’s legendary closed distillery, does not disappoint. The nose is akin to salted chocolate, with a wasabi-like earthiness lurking behind. Port Ellen’s characteristic flintiness is there in the form of rock-pools and hot sand inside seashells, while the smoke hints at sphagnum moss, marsh gas, and burnt cake. The palate has touches of smoked eel and a hint of pear. As enigmatic as ever, in other words. £175 (500 ml)
      		
 
			
 
2011 saw the first expression of Rosebank appear in Diageo’s annual Special Releases series, and just 5,604 bottles are available worldwide. The bottling is comprised of whisky matured in refill American oak and refill European oak casks. Floral and mildly herbal on the nose, with cereal and tropical fruit notes, along with a hint of damp soil. The palate is somewhat tart, with oranges and pepper, while the finish dries to coffee and spicy oak. A lovely example of a much-mourned malt. 
      		
 
			
 
A limited edition of 2000 bottles. Thick and syrupy on the palate, accentuated with vanilla and shortbread. You’ll also find pleasing peaches & cream, zingy citrus fruit, along with a hint of nuts, spice, and a pinch of salt on the palate. A nice addition to the 14 year old distillery bottling. Kudos for bottling it at cask strength. 

      		
 
			
 
Older Springbanks are becoming hard to find, and this one won't disappoint. It is packed with citrus notes (lemon, orange) often found in whiskies over 30 years old. Along with them you'll find subtle spice notes (especially cinnamon), red licorice, polished oak, and that signature Springbank fresh brininess, albeit a bit reserved. This Springbank is not as heavily sherried as some other older bottlings that have come and gone. If I wanted to be picky, I would like to see more of the Springbank briny zest and freshness here, but, giving its age, it is understandably reserved. This whisky's best feature is how surprisingly clean, rounded, and polished it is for 33 years old. Very nice.
      		
 
			
 
Finished in a rum cask. Gently sweet (caramel, vanilla cream, kiss of honey), with balancing fruit (lime, kiwi, green grape) and spice (white pepper, brine). Youthful (but not immature). Invigorating briny finish. I don’t know what kind of rum cask was used, but it comes across more like sugar cane juice-based rhum agricole than the molasses-based rums. Very nice! (A Park Avenue Liquor exclusive.) 
      		
 
			
 
Even with a refill sherry cask, bright fruit is the main theme to this whisky: strawberry-rhubarb pie, red raspberry preserve, red currant. But there’s honeyed malt for balance, along with suggestions of
coconut macaroon, marzipan, brine, and glazed ginger to keep things interesting. Distinctive. 
-> On page 77 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Deep amber color. Mature aroma-this is definitely an old whisky -with complex wood spices (cedar, vanilla, mint, caramel) and soft ripe fruit. Medium bodied and soft. Surprisingly balanced on the palate with an incredible depth and maturity. Its flavors are similar to its aroma, but a soft sweetness compliments the flavors and provides balance. Soothing, mellowing finish of considerable depth. 

      		
 
			
 
More subtle and teasing. Not as much a knock-out punch on the finish like the Talisker 10 and 18, but rather more steady intense blows to the abdomen for many rounds. An aging Talisker, but still with many redeeming qualities. It is drier than its younger siblings, with less fruit and more of a stony texture, with dried spices and lingering leather notes. This whisky requires more patience and demands more concentration, but it is still rewarding to the seasoned aficionado (with some extra pocket change). 

      		
 
			
 
A graceful Talisker. Soft toffee and caramel with balanced, gentle fruit. Hints of boat dock wood, damp peat, and fish nets. Warming spice notes (anise, pepper, and salt) provide intrigue and linger on through a warming, spicy finish. Well rounded, with enough depth on the palate to make up for the lack of punch in younger expressions.

      		
 
			
 
Diageo has introduced this new no age statement variant of Talisker single malt. The name reflects the distiller’s aspiration to enhance the maritime notes in this expression. Refill and rejuvenated casks have both contributed to its maturation. The nose is youthful but rounded, with brine, burning wood embers, vanilla, and honey. Sweet and spicy on the palate, with cranberries and black currants, while peat smoke is always present, plus black pepper. The finish lingers, with walnuts and fruity peat. £40
      		
 
			
 
Described as the smokiest whisky produced at Talisker, Dark Storm is exclusive to Travel Retail outlets, and maturation has taken place in deeply charred casks. Rich, fruity spices on the nose, quite citric, with brine and aromatic smoke. The smoke elbows its way to the fore in time. Full, sweet, fruity flavors on the palate, some vanilla, then smoke, licorice, and spice hit home. A classic Talisker smoke and chili finish, but cranked up a notch or two! £45/1 liter
      		
 
			
 
A very welcome arrival from new owners Ian MacLeod, this has been aged in sherry
wood. As a result, you can’t help comparing it to Macallan and while there’s
none of the oily depths, there are fragrant top notes of honey and apple before
some resin and warm leather develop, but no sulfur. Some of the richness is
lost with water, so I’d leave it as is. This is a stunner for a 10 year old and
is marked accordingly. Value Pick £34
      		
 
			
 
Younger Tomintoul whiskies are fairly straightforward, unassuming whiskies. Older expressions show more depth. What they all seem to have is a remarkable balance. Moreover, this whisky and its predecessor, the 27 year old, are surprisingly delicate and nimble for their age. This is an elegant whisky, with a toffee foundation, creamy vanilla, nougat, light summer fruits, a kiss of molasses, and gentle spice (cinnamon, mocha). Soft finish. Very pleasing.

      		
 
			
 
This bottling of Tullibardine was distilled in November 1989 and has been matured in a refill sherry butt. The U.S. allocation is 120 bottles. Initially, damp earth on the nose, sweetening to milk chocolate-covered fudge and vanilla, along with hazelnuts. Notes of plum and black pepper with time. The palate is fruity, with toffee, spice, and cedar wood notes. Long in the finish, with cereal and spicy resin. 
      		
 
			
 
Antique amber color. Mature aromas and flavors and wonderfully balanced. Notes of toffee, charred oak, marmalade, assorted candied fruit, soft leather and subtle spice. Pleasant, lingering finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Part of the “Rarest of the Rare” collection. Mosstowie was a limited production using Lomond stills for a brief time at the Miltonduff distillery. Very pale in color for a 30 year old whisky, and creamy on the palate. A very clean whisky. Bright fruit (apricot, lemon, sultana) and vanilla are the main flavors, with more subtle grass and hay notes. Soothing finish.
-> On page 78 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The first Diageo Special Releases Oban to be released since 2004 has been matured in rejuvenated American oak and second-fill bodega casks. The outturn is 2,860 bottles. Tinned peaches, ginger, caramel, and newly-sawn wood on the nose, with an accompanying marine note. Syrupy in the mouth, very sweet and spicy, with nutmeg, cinnamon, and baked apple. Contrast is provided by a splash of brine. Spicy in the drying finish, with ginger to the fore, plus more sea salt.
      		
 
			
 
It’s nice to see an older expression of Old Potrero. This one, named after a whiskey that survived San Francisco’s earthquake and subsequent fires of 1906, is certainly more mature and mellow than its younger predecessors. But don’t worry: there are plenty of teeth in this whiskey’s bite. It is still quite spicy and herbal too, with strong suggestions of juniper (and other botanicals found in gin) combined with spearmint, Earl Grey tea, orange peel, coriander, and cedar, layered with sweeter notes (vanilla, caramel, and toasted marshmallow). If you took a straight rye whisky, added distilled (and aged) Anchor “Our Special Ale,” and then topped it off with a kiss of Anchor’s Junipero gin for intrigue -- that’s what this whiskey tastes like to me.
      		
 
			
 
(Previously reviewed in Vol. 15, No. 3.) Certainly the most idiosyncratic of the bunch. A great whiskey if you like the flavors, but some might find the spices to be too “over the top,” and almost gin-like. Try it before you buy it. 

      		
 
			
 
Made from a mash containing 53% rye, and aged in used barrels. The relatively low rye content, along with being aged in used wood, means this is one soft, smooth rye whiskey. Gentle mint, green tea, cinnamon, nutmeg, roasted nuts, glazed fruit, and candied corn all lie on a bed of vanilla and caramel. I tasted a “work in progress” sample last year which showed more oak. This expression is much better. Not as complex or dynamic as the flagship “Rendezvous Rye” from High West (which I rated a 95), but I could drink this stuff all day long.
      		
 
			
 
A six-plus year old, barrel-strength rye whiskey. Young rye whiskeys show the true personality of the rye grain, and this is an excellent example. Bold spice notes of fresh mint, fiery cinnamon, and resinous clove. Sweeter notes of candied fruit, brandy, caramel, honey-tinged vanilla, and a suggestion of marzipan add balance. If you like your whiskeys young, bold, and unforgiving, this one’s for you.
      		
 
			
 
This is the thirteenth release in this series and we've reviewed about five of them; they have been very hit and miss, but the general trend has definitely been upward. These are casks selected by Angela D'Orazio, and they show what a diverse distillery Mackmyra has become. This is a dessert and cigar whisky, with melon, banana, and vanilla at one end, and chili spice and earthy, smoky malt at the other. Excellent. £110
      		
 
			
 
Cutty Sark master blender Kirsteen Campbell has hit the ground running and is playing a leading role in the revival of this iconic blend. Storm is a very different whisky than Tam o' Shanter. The nose is nuanced and light, with orange jelly and citrus juice; the palate is sophisticated, fruity, perfectly balanced, rounded, and gentle, with a high-percentage malt content evident in the mix. The finish is quite short but very more-ish. An amazing whisky for the price. £20 VALUE PICK
      		
 
			
 
Cutty Sark lost its way in recent years; expect that to change soon. Its owners have plans to return it to glory (and to include a 30 year old among its expressions — you read it here first). For the time being — if you can find it — this 18 year old is a sublime mix of soft plum and peach, sweet, pure grain, easy-drinking vanilla, and a deft oakiness all delivered in gentle and harmonious fashion. Masterful blending.
      		
 
			
 
Blended whiskies have taken a sexy turn for the better, and there have been some excellent attempts to innovate. Indeed, a gap has opened up between main label blends and this sort of thing, which is particularly brave because a world-class brand has let amateurs loose on it. That said, this is massive, with big earthy spice, peat, and sour fruits. There's some youthful sappiness in the mix, too, but it's not detrimental. Brave and impressive.  
      		
 
			
 
This cask strength, 29 year old 1982 expression in the Wemyss Malts range is the company’s first bottling of a single malt distilled at the Northern Highland distillery of Teaninich. Just 201 bottles have been released. The insistently fruity nose features overripe pears, heather in bloom, soft fudge, salted popcorn, cinnamon, and ginger. Soft and peachy on the palate, with darker spice notes, walnuts, and plain chocolate. The finish is lengthy, with more plain chocolate and some spiced oak. £110
-> On page 79 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Balance, complexity, and surprising maturity for its age -- these are the defining characteristics of the best Indian whisky I have ever tasted. Amrut is doing some great things, and this whisky just elevated them to a new level. Combining Indian malt and Scottish peated malt, this whisky shows a sweet side, but is never cloying, with rich caramel, vanilla custard, and fruit cocktail in light syrup, balanced by vibrant -- almost floral -- dried peat smoke, delicate white pepper, and a hint of tropical fruit (toasted coconut, pineapple). Soothing, lingering smoke finish. I look forward to more great whiskies from Amrut.
      		
 
			
 
Aged in bourbon casks, then sherry casks, then finished in bourbon casks. An interesting (and original?) approach, but is it worth all the effort? I think so. The sherry notes are clean, not cloying, and there’s plenty of oak resin on the palate for texture, and to balance the sherry’s sweetness. Liqueur-ish fruit (orange, raspberry, cherry, caramelized peach), along with a good peppering of dried spice (vanilla, ginger, cinnamon, anise). Distinctive resin on the finish props up the rest of the flavors. 
      		
 
			
 
Proof, if it were still needed, that Amrut intends to cement its position as the leading innovator in world whisky. Kadhambam is the sweetest of Amruts, as a result of a complex maturation process that has seen peated Amrut matured in local brandy and rum casks. There's a liqueur-like edge to it as a result, but it's a complex malt, with cherry blossom, peppercorn, and apple peel in the mix. Not the distillery's best, but very, very drinkable.
      		
 
			
 
Quite rich and chewy, with nutty toffee, vanilla fudge, nougat, chocolate cake, orchard fruit, and black cherry—all on a solid malty foundation. This isn’t one of those elegant, lighter-flavored blends with a high grain whisky content. The focus here is on fullness of flavor. A blend for the malt whisky drinker (but should also appeal to the more open-minded blend drinker, too).
      		
 
			
 
A marriage of 3 and 4 year old whisky aged in first-fill bourbon barrels, with the 4 year old portion being finished in oloroso sherry casks. Among the best of the Kilchoman releases to date. The first-fill bourbon packs a flavor punch, while the sherry softens, rounds, and adds complexity. Barrel char, burnt raisin, boat dock, and tarry rope, softened by caramel and enhanced with notes of tropical fruit. Surprisingly mature for its age and very distinctive. 
      		
 
			
 
It’s a crying shame that this great distillery is so rarely seen. Here, a bourbon cask has reduced the meatiness and amplified the fruity component, but these are fruits with depth and power, allied to dried flowers. The mango-like sweetness is reduced to syrup; there’s light plum jam and some old paper. Sweet on the tongue, with crystallized ginger, apricot, and a finish of spice, and the strange sweetness of licorice root. 
£84
      		
 
			
 
The Ichiro of the title is Ichiro Akuto, scion of the family which owned the now demolished Hanyu distillery, and proprietor of the brand new and incredibly cute (yes…distilleries can be cute) Chichibu distillery — even the name’s cute.
This release is a vatting of different (un-named) single malts from more than one distillery which have been aged in Japanese oak (mizunara, or Q.Mongolica). Mizunara has a highly distinctive aromatic spectrum — the Japanese say that it smells of temples, specifically the incense which scents Zen temples, but while totally accurate, that’s not much help if you haven’t been to one. Think of a heavy, exotic aroma of allspice, sandalwood, even redwood, and you’re almost there. In fact, if you think of the perfumed aspects of rye, but turned up a notch, then you’re in the right ballpark. In this one there’s even a hint of trail bar — maybe it’s a hike in a California old-growth forest.
The palate is soft and slow to start, then picks up mouthwatering acidity — there’s that rye parallel. Green plum and peach, balanced with spiciness on the end. Once encountered, never forgotten. £85. Price in US dollars was converted at time of review.
      		
 
			
 
The (sadly mothballed) Karuizawa distillery is at the opposite extreme to Eigashima. Peated malt, small stills, and sherry casks give a single malt of uncompromising weight and solidity. Those of you who thought Japan was all about the ethereal and limpid, think again. In musical terms, if Eigashima is the Modern Jazz Quarter, then Karuizawa is late period Coltrane, or if you prefer, it’s Black Flag to Eigashima’s Carole King.
Anyhoo, did I mention this bottling (like all of this quartet from Number One Drinks) is green? Or at least has a color akin to tarnished silver? The note is all chicory and coffee, earthiness and cardamom - whisky reduced to some weird essence by long maturation. The effect is one of an old-fashioned cough medicine (with less laudanum).
The palate is explosive with masses of camphor, tar, licorice, and squid ink. This is Japanese whisky at its most extreme, and fainthearts should not venture here. Those with a taste for the big and the bold will love it, however. £130. Price in US dollars was converted at time of review.
      		
 
			
 
Now a hugely welcome part of the core range, this whisky—made in Coffey stills at the Miyagikyo distillery—uses 100% malted barley as its base. The nose is all tinned peach, tropical fruit juice, and baked banana, with a surprising green celery note, coconut, and sherbet. The palate is silky, with some chocolate, biscuity oak, and orange blossom honey. Water brings those green notes forward to add freshness to the peach cobbler sweetness. The grain revolution builds. £43
      		
 
			
 
Imported from Canada (which suggests that maybe this whiskey was originally intended to be the flavoring component of a Canadian whisky?) and bottled in Vermont. This is a 100% unmalted rye whiskey (much higher than other traditional straight rye whiskeys). Indeed, this whiskey bleeds spices (especially brisk mint, vibrant clove, and teasing nutmeg), but there’s a rich, sweet foundation to balance it all (honeyed vanilla, caramel, butterscotch, and nutty toffee), along with candied citrus and charcoal. Bold, spicy, nutty toffee, butterscotch finish. Very distinctive, and probably a polarizing whiskey.
-> On page 80 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Booze candy from Beam? More like bacon in a glass: the sweet smokiness invaded my dining room (definitely the last tasting of the day). Richly smoky-sweet, with a clear balance of maple over corn; like a rustic breakfast of bacon, pancakes, and whiskey! The maple’s restrained and authentic, the 45% keeps it from being too sweet, and there’s plenty of good bourbon flavor here, especially at the finish. Lush, tasty; if you have to do flavors, here’s how.
      		
 
			
 
More oak, intensity, depth, maturity, and character than the standard Jim Beam white. Darker sugars too, showing more caramel and light toffee, less honeyed corn and vanilla (although those notes are certainly still present). Subtle mint and cinnamon spice, along with soft fruit and light tobacco on the finish round out the flavor profile. A bourbon comfortably positioned between Jim Beam white and the more premium Signature Series releases.
      		
 
			
 
A cask strength expression of Kornog showing great maturity, yet born from Glann ar Mor’s small pot stills and condensed through the coils of their worm tubs. The smoke is beguiling; sweet and aromatic with tokens of vanilla and an underlying faceful of Atlantic sea spray. It is sweet, fruit-led—especially mango—though the alcohol never dominates, more like a sunburst through a cloud. The finish is moreish, returning to the salt, which only makes you thirsty for another pour. €95
      		
 
			
 
Lark is on Australia’s frontline, but this is a hard sell. This is big bucks for untried whisky. No doubt though, this is history in the making. There’s a big cinnamon and nutmeg kick to this, and with water, a rootsy, sweet apple core and a menthol hit wrap themselves around flavors of crab apples and dates. It’s different, easy to like, and exciting. Australian whisky is on a roll. AUD220 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
A limited-edition (600 bottles), cask strength version of Angel’s Envy. More alcohol and more portwood influence than that standard release. Rich and lush in texture, with a sweet personality. Notes of ripe berried fruit, maple syrup, honeyed tangerine, vanilla, and background spice. Distinctive, with a soothing, velvety finish. I’d prefer less port influence, more aligned with the standard release, but it’s still a very enjoyable bourbon. Best after dinner, with a cigar.
      		
 
			
 
The third cask strength release and, like all Angel’s Envy bourbons, this one is finished in port barrels. When compared to the standard bottling, this cask strength release is packed with more of everything. It’s lush and palate-coating. Fruit forward too, with honey-coated cherries, sultana, ripe peach, pineapple in syrup, peppered with clove and vanilla, and wrapped in a silky smooth finish. This whiskey pushes the envelope of port finishing.
      		
 
			
 
Poor old Auchroisk. Not only couldn’t anyone pronounce it correctly (it’s “Oth Rusk,” in case you’re interested), but in recent years it’s seen its Singleton prefix hijacked by other larger distilleries — Glendullan, Dufftown, Glen Ord — leaving it somewhat forgotten by malt mavens. Part of the old J&B stable, it continues to make a malty/nutty spirit, a style which is also somewhat out of favor in the world of single malts. 
Maybe this bottling (in a rather spiffing retro pack) will redress the balance. The color is full gold, and though initially the nose shows the high bottling strength to the max, beneath the prickly heat is eucalyptus oil alongside those signature nutty/cereal notes. But here’s the difference; there’s sweetness, too: toffee and thick clover honey, even a touch of sawdust and pencil shavings before a drop of water brings out malted milk and powdered hazelnut. In other words, there’s plenty of distillery character, but good cask development. 
In the mouth, when neat, the needling alcohol slightly numbs the tongue and the effect from start to finish is a bit fragmented. Add water, however (not too much), and there’s a soft, creamy effect across the tongue with praline, almond, and a dark chocolate note as well. Be careful with the water though, as you need to retain the zesty acidity on the finish. 
      		
 
			
 
This is the latest spinoff from core blend The Famous Grouse, so there’s Macallan and Highland Park in here, and from the taste of it, in sizeable quantities. With smart but minimalist packaging and an environmental theme, this is a very ‘now’ whisky. It’s heavily sherried, very rich, and sweet, but there’s enough spice to stop it becoming cloying, and it’s as soft as a down feather blanket on the palate. You can easily drink it straight, too.  
      		
 
			
 
The fourth in a series of limited-edition Taylor bottlings, and the first barrel-proof release. Layered sweet notes of caramel and nougat, with bright orchard fruit (especially nectarine), dried spice (vanilla, mint), and pencil shavings. The dried spice notes linger on the finish, along with tobacco. Bourbon with attitude.  
      		
 
			
 
Quite dark in color, turning cloudy with water. Don’t let that deter you. A thick, chewy bourbon, with layers of nutty toffee,
nougat, cocoa, and toasted marshmallow, peppered with cinnamon and vanilla. Oak and leather on the finish dry out the whiskey nicely. Not the most refined bourbon, but the flavors it delivers make up for it.
-> On page 81 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Quite lush—the port influence is clearly obvious and adds a degree of opulence to this bourbon. Notes of ripe cherry dipped in caramel, then light molasses, blend in with more traditional bourbon notes of vanilla and spice. A pleasant diversion from the bourbon norm, and ideal for postprandial consumption. (It begs for a fine cigar, for those inclined.)
      		
 
			
 
One of the debut whiskeys at WhiskyFest New York 2012, this was finished in a barrel that held Virginia-made port…after it was used to age Bowman whiskey, a boomerang finish. The nose gives baking chocolate, tropical flowers, and yes, some of that port. Peppery and port-edged on the tongue, solid fire from the 100 proof, fat corn and fruit in the middle of the palate. Busy, but purposeful. There’s a lot here and it’s all working together.  
      		
 
			
 
Last year saw the release of the Yamazaki “component” range, examples of the cask types that help make up its single malt releases. Now, Hakushu has joined in. The name doesn’t lie, this is very smoky, heathery, fragrant with orris-like dryness alongside Hakushu’s classic vegetal notes of elderflower, bamboo, and moorland grass. The palate shows praline, ripe lychee, and kiwi working alongside this mix of integrated smoke and clean focus. It also makes a fantastic Hiball.
      		
 
			
 
Tons of vanilla and sweet custard in the nose, enough to make the mouth water, and not fake-smelling at all. Once again, the 40% makes a difference: light and sweet in the mouth, like a glass of creme brulee eau de vie! I'd enjoyed the sweet vanilla-spice character so much that the whisky slipping in at the end was almost a shock, but it's there, and even adds a bit of mint and fire. Embarrassingly tasty. 
      		
 
			
 
Made from roasted Hopi blue corn. The nose says bourbon—sweet, corn, faint maple—but with big notes of stone fruits. It's lush. Mouth veers off in another direction with floury corn, oaked complexity, an herbal component, like crushed stems of wildflowers, and cinnamon/allspice notes. The finish is suddenly mellow, with a seductive creaminess high in the back palate. Even at a young 50%, never really fiery. Wonderfully complex, and not over-oaked; beautiful stuff.
      		
 
			
 
Southern Coast Distillers is part of a new wave of distillers in Victoria, South Australia, and unlike many fledgling distilleries who bottle too early and learn their trade in public view, with blemished, linseed-sappy malt, this distillery has hit the ground running and is already making fabulous whisky. There isn't an off note here, and it combines lemon sherbet bonbons, honeyed vanilla, bitter dark chocolate, licorice, and some pepper. Delightful. A$110
      		
 
			
 
If big smoke and peat don't float your boat and you'd rather metaphorically skip through a summer orchard while drinking whisky, then the Speyside version of Clan Denny is the full fruit bowl. The mixing of malts means that sherry and bourbon Speysiders get a say, so it's the complete package, and there's lots going on. Ultimately, though, it's not quite as focused as the Islay. Damn close call, though.€36
      		
 
			
 
The historic Telser distillery has been producing spirits for generations. Their pride and joy: a triple distilled whisky produced in two wood-fired stills before being matured wholly in French oak 
 that previously contained Pinot Noir. There are overripe melons, powdery icing sugar, and an unobtrusive jamminess on the nose. The flavorsome palate hits you with bright yellow fruits, then twists brilliantly to divulge deep orange and peeled plum skin balanced with gingerbread (
) CHF 290
      		
 
			
 
A cask strength, single cask bottling available through one UK outlet, this is still worthy of inclusion because it's further proof that India and Asia have the potential to produce world-class malts. This is just 3 years old but it's blemish-free and packed with flavor. Orange, lemon, and berries battle it out with jasmine, cinnamon, and nutmeg, and although my sample is marked 'unpeated' and a fully peated version is planned for 2013, there's still some earthiness at the core. Very good indeed. £60
      		
 
			
 
Clean on the palate, with honey-kissed citrus, summer fruits, crisp mint, and cinnamon, balanced by creamy vanilla and soft toffee. A solid bourbon that’s nicely rounded and vibrant. It’s very much with the current trend of American whiskeys toward no age statement; youthful and playful in nature, and versatile.
-> On page 82 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Sweet citrus fruits, floral overtones, and assertive peppery spices interlace a generous framework of silky oak tannins. Charred oak and pencil shavings hint at new oak, while the frosty crispness of dry autumn leaves confirms that at least some of this whisky has spent decades in reused barrels. Touches of almond skins and peach pits cleanse the late palate. Otherwise regal and elegant, this whisky is just a touch woody.  C$30 
      		
 
			
 
Last year’s cask strength version was 55% and way too young. There is also a view that the early stages of maturation in port are not only inconsistent, but can be negatively wayward. No such problems here. This is no longer an ugly duckling but a young swan: rich fruitcake, fresh summer fruits, and a charcoal undercarpet that helps quash the overly sweet notes. This then is the world's most improved whisky. A$170
      		
 
			
 
First of two bottlings. The Old Hobart distillery used 100-liter sherry French oak quarter casks to create this beauty. Hediard fruit jellies (blackcurrant, quince, and mango), nutmeg, cassia, hot sand, and caramelized biscuits. The sherry gives a willowy soft opener, with tobacco, bitter plums, and Earl Grey tea bleeding out to dark toffees, espresso, and a Flemish biscuit note. Water produces a cappuccino finish. For the alcohol content, the pair are similarly priced, but this one offers greater rewards. £189
      		
 
			
 
Brenne is from the Cognac region of France and is becoming an American success story, having been launched stateside by Allison Patel, but little known elsewhere. After 6 years in French oak, 2 years in a Cognac barrel, and reduced by the local water to 40%, the result is a delicate, almost floral, eucalyptus and rosewater delight, with honeycomb and sweet spice. Very different from a standard malt, but very good all the same.
      		
 
			
 
The first conventional release from this fledgling company. Irish whiskey's equivalent to a seemingly frothy sweet pop song, which on closer inspection has barbed and cutting lyrics. It's a sweet Irish blend and seems like it. But it has a high malt content, is packed with flavor, and it easily justifies its price. It's creamy and rich with toffee notes, there's some tropical fruit and delicious rum-and-raisin milk chocolate. Not too cloying despite the sweetness, either. 
      		
 
			
 
Pronounced “Pot Doo,” this is without doubt a rugged coastal and/or island whisky, but on a mild and temperate day. Salt, spice, and peat are all to the fore, but it’s a gentle giant of a whisky, with some citrus drizzle and a light honeycomb heart. The main wood influence seems to soften the delivery so that the punch it packs won’t floor you. Beautifully put together, though.
      		
 
			
 
Aged 7 years, 1 month, and 7 days. Big and chewy, with nutty toffee, molasses, nougat, tobacco, pencil shavings, subtle
fruit, and dried spice (cinnamon, vanilla). Leather, barrel char, and a hint of licorice root on the finish. Big, bold, and very enjoyable.
      		
 
			
 
Solid, chunky bottle with idiosyncratic whiskey inside. Straightforward rye crisps out of the glass in no-nonsense style; dry grain, sweet grass, and light but insistent anise almost wholly drown out the
barrel character. The mouth is as dry and spicy-medicinal as the nose hints at, laying down character like a winning hand: rye SNAP! heat SNAP! light tarragon SNAP! oak SNAP! and a warm wrap-up finish SNAP! Full house, flavors over sensations. Clean 
 interesting. Nicely played.
      		
 
			
 
If you needed proof that Scotch whiskies don’t fit neatly into established categories, look no further than this marine style, peated Highland malt. Sea salt, oyster shells, and light smoke lead the nose, with hay and apricot underneath. In the entry, the flavors burst on the palate with sea salt, honey, malt, oak, and smoke. Peat smoke really builds in the mid-palate but manages not to lose the supporting flavors, although it becomes the real star of a long finish. (
)
      		
 
			
 
Smoky! Can you get dessert seaweed? Because that’s what this smells of. Candied ginger notes alongside a distinct salinity—think winkles—and in time a hint of verjus, even lanolin with water. The palate shows balanced smoke, paprika, then white pepper. The best smoky Bunna’ I’ve come across, showing maturity, balance, and no rubberiness. In time, there’s notes of old (refill) sherry cask. Released for the 2014 London Whisky Show but still commercially available. £75
-> On page 83 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Here, Craigellachie is slimmed down and appears in slightly leaner guise, with an aromatic spritz of vetiver-heavy male cologne coming across first before fresh fruits follow on. More crisp and with slightly more obvious toasted structure. The pineapple distillery character is now dried, before the palate shows sweet chocolate pudding, char, honeysuckle, herbs, and white fruits. A classy (and large) package. 
€135/liter
      		
 
			
 
This 17 year old independent bottling of Ben Nevis has somewhat unusually been matured in a 
 sherry cask, rather than the more common 
 or PX.   The nose offers initial milk chocolate notes, then a whiff of cold roast pork and oak. In time, strawberry and mango aromas appear. The mouthfeel is pleasingly full, decidedly gingery, with caramel and dry sherry. Spicy, mild sherry and raisins in a long, lively finish.
      		
 
			
 
Alasdair Day is on a mission to build a new Lowland distillery in the Borders of Scotland. While we wait, the next batch from his grandfather’s cellar book is a pale, golden dram with a delectable nose of lemon meringue pie, spring blossoms, peach pit, candy floss, and Valrhona Ivoire white chocolate. This is more-ish whisky: like spooning into panna cotta. Pear syrup, white chocolate, and a sizzle of toasted muffins dissipate into a mild ginger and gooseberry finish. £40
      		
 
			
 
The debut release from Don Sutcliffe's Sutcliffe & Sons, this small-batch blend of grain whiskies comes from several different distilleries including Loch Lomond, North British, and a 30 year old whisky from Carsebridge. The blend is married in first-fill sherry casks, which brings bright fruit to a fairly light whisky with notes of blackberry, vanilla, honey, light oak, and iris. Quite good for a grain whisky blend, but falls just short of being exceptional. (
)
      		
 
			
 
Gently peated malt was distilled and matured in bourbon and new American oak casks by Claus and Michael Braunstein. A refined nose of smoked duck terrine, with fudge, gentle vanilla, and lime zest underneath. Rather elegant, with a note-perfect balance between the smoke and the sweetness. There’s a huge explosion of mandarin, Milka chocolate, sharp citrus, espresso, treacle, licorice, and dry, wrinkly dates. The finish of rich, black coffee is smooth, sultry, and long. 795kr
      		
 
			
 
This is a 70/30 blend of aged single malt whiskey and single pot still whiskey (though no grain whiskey), matured in bourbon barrels for around 7 to 9 years. Revel in the spicy aromas of clove, cinnamon, and star anise balanced with green apple, blossom honey, and dry, oily vanilla pods. The mouthfeel is weighty and dense from the pot still, yet rich in honey, spice, and vanilla, with a tongue-enveloping finish of custard cream biscuits.
      		
 
			
 
Rye spice is the first thing on the nose: cinnamon-spiked hard candy, hot and juicy. Beautifully oily and bitter rye character slides across the tongue on a wave of sweet caramel and vanilla. Young, but in the eager intensity of rye, not the clumsy heat of bourbon. Rye shines here, from the first whiff to the last bitter curl on the tongue, and the wood deftly sweetens and soothes. Nicely done.
      		
 
			
 
After 21 years in refill sherry, this whiskey was finished for 4 months in their preferred Mallorcan Ànima Negra barrels. Here, they achieve a sublime marriage of the sherry cask and finishing vessel, perfecting the aromas of fresh-sliced fig, sherry trifle, and crystalized pineapple. Tight and dense flavor, offering spangles, apricot jam, fragrant spices, raspberry, toffee, and maraschino cherry. Real quality and depth of character lasting through to the long, fruity finish of dates and stewed fruits. (328 bottles) €195
      		
 
			
 
Kerrygold is Ireland’s major player in the dairy business. Scored against other Irish cream liqueurs, this is highly rated. I’m smitten. The sweet chocolate is rich, delectable, and utterly gorgeous, with melting caramels slathered all over the taste buds, riding high on a wave of lush Irish cream. There are fruity notes of sultana and black cherry, expressed by the chocolate, which soar above the reliable foundation of Irish whiskey. Can you tell this won my heart? Do indulge.
      		
 
			
 
Incredibly smooth for a rye whiskey (almost too smooth), but still with plenty of character to make the journey very entertaining. Notes of evergreen, almonds, and bright fruit lie on a bed of caramel, honeyed vanilla, and banana bread. Lingering spicy finish. 

-> On page 84 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Light and easy drinking. Very clean on the palate, with notes of creamy vanilla, subtle fruit, and delicate floral notes. Light, clean finish. When I think of Canadian whisky, this is the whisky that comes to mind. 

      		
 
			
 
With a rich nose like warm maple syrup, it’s hard to miss that this is a flavored whisky. But the maple smells real, like breakfast in a Vermont diner. It’s also good that it’s not sickly sweet and thick; the mouthfeel is like good Crown with maple flavor, not a big wad of syrup. So if you like flavored whiskies, bring on the Canadian cocktails and ice cream: this is the good stuff.  
      		
 
			
 
Consisting of whiskies aged between 6 to 10 years, with a similar grain component as a bourbon (but distilled differently) and finished in sherry casks for six months. Barrel Select is a soft, silky, somewhat feminine whiskey when compared to bourbon, with gently sweet notes of creamy vanilla, honeyed apricot, toasted nuts, and gentle background tropical fruit and spice. A whisky that really transcends category and definition. 

      		
 
			
 
This “amped-up” version of John K. Hall’s signature Barrel Select is not so much better as it is bigger and bolder. Cloves, ginger, and cinnamon burst over creamy rich butterscotch and searing red pepper, restrained only by dry rye grain and bitter orange. The initial fireworks complete, figgy dark fruit and nutty milk chocolate swirl capriciously over fragrant spring flowers, soft vanilla, and delicate herbal maple syrup. Dramatic and delightful. 
      		
 
			
 
Connemara is the peated Irish whiskey from the Cooley distillery, and this one is their (and Ireland’s) smokiest offering yet. This is the first time I ever detected dung (albeit subtly) in a whiskey — and only on the nose, thankfully. It’s curiously intriguing. The style of peat used, along with the youth of this whiskey, has a distinct impact of the whiskey’s flavor. It’s sweet and smoky, which works well. Throw in some bacon fat, diesel oil smoke (like at a boat dock), anise, ginger, honeyed malt, barley, lime, and pear. Underneath all that peat lies what seems like a fairly young whiskey, because it is very brisk and vibrant, but not excessively so. Bonus points for distinctiveness.
      		
 
			
 
Bog oak is oak preserved in Irish peat bogs for 5,000 years, and for this whiskey, cask heads made of it are used for maturation. The whiskey is 3 year old Turf Mor, only a year older, then mixed with some older whiskeys, and it's intriguing. This has all the oily, burning dust, smoky notes of a standard Connemara, but the rubbery youthfulness of Turf Mor is gone, and this is sweet, with orange notes, and a long, peaty, sweet finish. € 250  
      		
 
			
 
Straw color. In both aroma and flavor, the whiskey is clean and delicate, with notes of creamy malt, vanilla, and subtle fruit. An enjoyable “anytime” whiskey that slowly reveals its charms the more you get to know it.

   Style: Single malt Irish whiskey. Price: high $30s. Available nationwide. 

   The third in a series of Knappogue whiskeys that were distilled at Ireland's Cooley distillery (the others being a 1991 and 1990 vintage). This one is fuller in flavor than the previous two, but not as distinctive. It's a very pleasant 'anytime' dram.
      		
 
			
 
Knappogue Castle’s first non-vintage, and the oldest since the original 1951 vintage release. The whisky is from three different vintages -- 1990, 1991, and 1992 -- which were married together. I am pleased to see an older expression, because I have always felt that the previous releases, generally 10 years old or less, needed a little more time to blossom. Sweeter notes of peaches and cream, pineapple upside-down cake, banana bread, and vanilla wafer are balanced by a spicy, resinous dry finish. A textural whisky that coats the palate. My favorite of the post-1951 vintage Knappogues.
      		
 
			
 
Named for the distillery of the same name, and where many other well-know Irish blends are produced (including Jameson, Powers, Paddy, and Tullamore Dew). This is the distillery’s ultra-premium blend offering. The whiskey is somewhat shy and bashful in personality (when compared to its pure pot still siblings like Redbreast and the quite rare Jameson 15 year old) and really takes some patience to appreciate its subtle beauty. Sweet notes of honeyed malt and vanilla up front, with a hint of marshmallow and summer fruits. The palate eventually dries out nicely and deepens, evolving into a medley of subtle spice. Very drinkable. 

      		
 
			
 
Matured in a bourbon cask. Cardhu has always been a pleasant, but uninspiring, whisky to me. This is one of the best Cardhu whiskies I’ve tasted -- richer and more distinctive. (At this price, it had better be!) It’s clean and tight, with orange, tangerine, lemon gumdrops, ginger, delicate honey, butterscotch, and vanilla, with a dusting of powdered sugar. Straightforward, pleasing finish. (252 bottles)  
-> On page 85 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Bright gold color. Fresh aromas of smoked olives, brine, exotic pepper, and fried bacon. Rich in body, and slightly oily in texture. In flavor, this is a big, dynamic whisky-smoked olives, sea salt, seaweed, mustard seed, all on a backdrop of vanilla sweetness. Long, smoky finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Gold color. Floral aromas balanced with a gentle vanilla sweetness, and soft fruit. Soft, rounded body. The palate delivers what the aroma promises in a very clean and balanced way. Pleasing finish. 

      		
 
			
 
A ripe proposition, the fruit and the smoke locked tightly together like interwoven fingers. Peaches, melon, baked apple, fresh mango, and sugar strands with a supporting role of red berries. With a malt content exceeding two-thirds, the full-bodied palate is sweet as brown sugar, with mandarin tartness, apple, and red licorice meandering to a vinous finish of red berry fruit. With its cheeky Glasgow landmark on the label, this permanent addition to the GKS range is pure gallus.
      		
 
			
 
Similar in profile to the 12 year old expression below, except that the bouquet is thicker, the sweetness is more caramelized, and the fruit notes are drier (no surprises). There’s also more depth and maturity in this whisky, more oak spice, and a longer, drier finish. An excellent value! 

      		
 
			
 
Available only at the distillery or online, and limited to 5,000 special decanters, this is a special Famous Grouse release to mark the 30th anniversary of the blend. Be careful, though:  it's not a 30 year old blend. But it is excellent and there's lots of very old, woody, and ripe malt in the mix. As Highland Park and The Macallan are in the stable, expect a fruity, oaky, superbly balanced treat.  £80
      		
 
			
 
Legendary master blender John Ramsay handpicked the casks for this whisky, and the job was completed by his successor, Gordon Motion. Puffy marshmallows, nougat, fallen orchard fruit, green cardamom, and clove; it’s like all the threads pull together harmoniously. A lucid concentration of fruit mingles on the tongue, preceding flavor advancement through spearmint, menthol, light peat smoke, and burning orange oils. Sit back as it heads toward a spicy tingle of ginger, apple, and scorched coriander seed. Deservedly famous. £2,000
      		
 
			
 
Somebody at Diageo has been taking a lot of interest in the Johnnie Walker range of late, what with the revamp of the core range and now a regular stream of special releases. This is the first of a series for Travel Retail only, but it takes the Johnnie Walker themes — vanilla, spice, and honey, with wispy peat and smoke — and adds savory spice to the earthiness. But there are some very young notes in this. 
      		
 
			
 
The fourth in the series of limited-edition bottlings, and one of the better ones. The impact on the whiskey of finishing in barrels made with staves that have been seasoned three to five years really is evident here. There’s plenty of wood spice, and I think it goes well with the sweet pot still characteristics. On the nose, the flavors are nicely intertwined. But on the palate, the sweeter notes (caramel, nutty toffee, fig, ripe berries, black cherry) appear first, with the dry, spicy notes (cinnamon, clove, cocoa powder, vanilla, polished leather, maduro tobacco) building to a firmly dry finish. Perhaps the dryness on the finish overstays its welcome more than I would like. But still, this is a solid effort -- and quite distinctive!
      		
 
			
 
A set of two 100% rye whiskeys, triple distilled in copper pot stills, with the difference between them being the type of barrels in which they were aged. One was matured in a new charred cask, while the other one was aged in a used cask. They are packaged in half-bottle sizes (375 ml) and sold as a set for $100.
Dark in color and deep on the palate. Plenty of weight, too. A base of caramel, with warming cinnamon, persistent mint, brandy-soaked apple, tobacco, polished leather, and oak grip on the finish.
      		
 
			
 
Woodford’s first permanent line extension. Aged in two barrels with different toast and char amounts.  More visceral than the standard Woodford Reserve, with a darker personality, extra wood spice, and a nice sweet foundation. Notes of cinnamon stick, dark berried fruit, roasted nuts, caramel, creamy vanilla, and polished leather.
-> On page 86 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Nice effort overall. My gut feeling is that this whiskey 
 have been better a couple years ago, but I wouldn’t call the second barrel impact excessive. It’s rich and smooth, with sweeter notes of caramel, rich vanilla, and subtle candied fruit, underpinned by firm spice (especially cinnamon) which kicks in on the finish. It comes across as very traditional bourbon, with perhaps a little extra oak impact on the back end. Price is per 375 ml.

      		
 
			
 
Dark, big, and brooding. A mouthful of oak spice, resin, and leather. Surprisingly (and happily) the oak is never excessive — even on the finish. A mélange of toffee, maple syrup, and candy corn props it all up. The flavors aren’t as well defined as its sibling release (reviewed above), and there’s a peculiar hint of “dunnage warehouse” (think damp earth) to it that adds intrigue. A very characterful whiskey worthy of debate. Price is per 375ml.
      		
 
			
 
Quite bold and crisply spicy. The most palate-piercing of the three. Well defined flavors of cool mint, warming cinnamon, honey-kissed fruit, and caramel. Briskly spicy finish. When I nose this whiskey, it feels like it’s brandishing a sword at me and shouting “en garde!”
      		
 
			
 
My favorite of the two [Buffalo Trace Experimental Collection Giant French Oak Barrel]. Surprisingly sweet, with layers of caramel, butterscotch, nougat, and subtle creamy vanilla.  This whiskey defies its age. A blend of dried spice on the nose and the finish of the palate balances the sweetness. A very enjoyable (and drinkable) whiskey. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
These releases are all the same age, but this one tastes the oldest, and in a higher weight class. Deep and dark in personality. Chewy, with some tobacco and roasted nuts thrown in the mix, along with the toffee, dark pit fruit, oak spice, and leather on the finish. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Well-defined flavors and clean on the palate. Wood is the driving influence here, showing plenty of dried spice throughout with a dry, resinous finish. The spice notes are accompanied by a layer of caramel, dried spice (vanilla, cinnamon, nutmeg), and subtle orchard fruits. The dry oak notes overstay their welcome for balance. Otherwise, it’s a very pleasant whiskey. Price per 375 ml.

 
      		
 
			
 
Each of these three bourbons was distilled and bottled at the same time, and aged in the same warehouse for 12 years and 3 months. The main variable was the floor they were aged on. In theory, the higher up in the warehouse, the greater the temperature variation, and the more wood influence. Does the experiment support this general concept? Yes, with the sweet spot being the middle floor.

Soft and sweet, oozing caramel, honeyed vanilla, and gentle, ripe orchard fruit. Soft, gently sweet finish. Not the most complex of the three in this experiment, but it’s very easy-going and soothing on the palate. A nice pairing for a cigar, where the sweet notes will marry nicely with the cigar’s dried spice. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Sweeter notes of pecan pie, dates, sweet corn, candied fruit, and English toffee combine with dried spices -- cinnamon heat, vanilla, and mint -- which crescendoes on its long, dry finish. A nicely matured bourbon with decent weight to it. Some of the expressions in the earlier part of the decade were a little heavy on the oak, but the last couple of years have shown greater balance.
      		
 
			
 
Bolder, with more spice than other Elmer T. Lee single barrel offerings I’ve tried over the years. A bit more vibrant too. Fresh notes of cinnamon, vanilla, wood shavings, ground black pepper, clove, subtle tobacco, and a hint of nutmeg on a bed of caramel and honeyed orchard fruit. Firm, warming, spicy finish. Most releases I’ve had were mellower and smoother (the 90
 Birthday release comes to mind), but this is very dynamic and vibrant.
      		
 
			
 
After a false start several years back, it’s a pleasure to finally see Four Roses Single Barrel available here in the U.S. This whiskey is nicely balanced, with a teasing subtleness to it. I particularly enjoy its delicately honeyed, floral, crisply spicy aroma, with underlying notes of vanilla cream and candied fruit. These flavors follow through on the palate, initially with honey-laced fruit, caramel, and soft vanilla notes, leading to a dry spiciness (mint, cinnamon) and refined oak. It finishes crisp and pleasingly dry. None of the flavors are dominant, and bottling it at 50% is a bonus. 

-> On page 87 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
A marriage of four different bourbon recipes aged between 11 and 13 years. Very elegant and stylish, as with many of the Four Roses offerings. Its age also shows, with a firm measure of wood spice and grip on the nose and the latter half of the palate. Soft honey, bright fruit (sultana, ripe peach, tangerine), and spice (cinnamon, nutmeg, crisp rye), evolving into darker fruit and more caramelized sugars on the palate, along with leather notes on the finish. 
      		
 
			
 
The same vintage as last year’s Birthday Bourbon but aged one year longer. Last year’s version was quite intense with a lot of wood influence. What does one more year in wood do to the whisky? Surprisingly, the oak spice seems less dominant, and the flavors are more balanced. Still, this is still a serious bourbon drinker’s bourbon. Piquant, dried spice notes of vanilla, cocoa, mint, and cinnamon are tamed by layers of maple syrup, caramel, and toffee. Every once in a while some fruits try to get recognized. A powerful, after dinner bourbon. 

      		
 
			
 
Rather bold (especially with the spice notes), with dark fruit (black raspberry jam, plum), citrus glaze, vibrant spice (vanilla, cinnamon, clove), a dusting of cocoa powder, polished leather, and pencil shavings, all on a bed of caramel. Long, spicy finish.  A nice way to finish a rich, hearty meal, perhaps? 
      		
 
			
 
The last time I reviewed this whiskey was back in 2004, and this new bottling is an improvement. It’s beefier, thicker, and richer, with a good dose of rye spice. Very nice! Good balance of flavors on the nose and palate, with caramel custard, bright fruit (clementine, golden raisin, orange marmalade), a peppering of spice (fresh mint, warming cinnamon, dried vanilla), green tea, a hint of toasted marshmallow, and a pleasing dried oak, tobacco-tinged finish. Lots of character!
      		
 
			
 
Similar in flavor to the Aberfeldy 12 reviewed below, but with more depth. There’s more orange rind in the marmalade notes, along with Clementine and coconut. The whisky finishes drier too, with a spicy flair. Still quite clean and nicely balanced throughout. A whisky for those of you who want a fun whisky that’s not heavy on the palate. 

      		
 
			
 
(Reviewers note: this is an exclusive bottling to Park Avenue Liquors, New York, NY.) This is signature Ardbeg: young (but not too young), bold, and with an attitude too! Its flavors are reminiscent of crumbled peat thrown on a campfire, with notes of damp earth, pepper, and seaweed. Still, there’s a soft underbelly of vanilla sweetness that helps to tame this beast and provide balance. A peppery, kippered, smoky finish entertains long after the whisky disappears. Make this your last whisky of the evening. 

      		
 
			
 
6,660 bottles of The Devil’s Punch Bowl have been released, and the component whiskies come from 24 casks filled between 1996 and 2006. They include a number of sherry butts, and some peated spirit is included in the mix. The nose offers soft, mellow malt, dried fruits, and milk chocolate. Silky smooth and deceptively drinkable at full strength, the palate is nutty and notably fruity, with ginger and brittle toffee. A hint of barbecue sauce in the sweet finish.
      		
 
			
 
Isle of Arran distillers is now offering exclusive bottlings in the U.S. along the same lines as those already available in the UK, starting with 16 year old single cask, cask strength variants. Arran Premium Sherry Single Cask #1979 displays milk chocolate, vanilla, new leather, wood polish, and butterscotch on the nose. More vanilla in time. The palate is richly sherried, with espresso, fruit loaf, nutmeg, and old wood. Lively spices persist in the lingering, leathery finish.  
      		
 
			
 
As it progresses toward the ultimate goal of an 18 year old expression in 2015, Arran has released a 16 year old, matured in 30
percent sherry hogsheads and 70 percent bourbon casks. The edition is limited to 9,000 bottles. The nose features malt, milk chocolate, and honey, with a citric edge. The palate mirrors the nose with more malt, honey, and milk chocolate, plus ginger, nutmeg, and spicy oak. Spiced fruits in the lengthy finish.
      		
 
			
 
This 38 year old Travel Retail-exclusive expression has been aged in bourbon casks, and not chill filtered. It follows an initial batch of the same vintage, released in 2011. The nose is perfumed, with a resin note and developing vanilla and caramel popcorn. Demerara sugar and oak. Very fruity on the palate, with oranges and lemons, emerging spices, and benign oak. Long in the finish, with fruity oak. The additional maturation has given the fruity elements a greater profundity. 
-> On page 88 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Very fruity (peaches in syrup, pineapple, golden apple, sultana) and satisfyingly rich in texture, with coating vanilla, marzipan, and a potpourri of dried spice (especially on the nose and finish of the palate). Great balance too. Nicely done!
      		
 
			
 
Matured in second-fill bourbon casks, this expression of Balblair offers a distinctive aroma of bananas, along with cooking apples, sultanas, nuts, and spices. It is full-bodied and exhibits a palate of toffee and spicy fruits, and becomes increasingly chocolate-y, with distinct cocoa notes, when given time to breathe. Raisin notes also develop. The finish is lengthy and smooth, with lasting lively spice and vanilla.
      		
 
			
 
Balblair 2001 Vintage is the first distillery bottling to be non-chill filtered, noncolored, and offered at 46%. It is 10 years old and has been matured in ex-bourbon barrels. The nose offers lemonade, vanilla, allspice, and developing milk chocolate and caramel notes. Clean and straightforward on the palate; sweet and spicy, with tangerines, eating apples, toffee, and more milk chocolate. Cocoa powder in the spicy, relatively lengthy finish. £33
      		
 
			
 
Following the initial release of a 1997 vintage Balblair in 2007, a second edition has now been launched, with the spirit in question having benefited from an additional five years’ maturation in first-fill bourbon barrels. Fresh, light, and fruity on the nose: tinned peaches, pear drops, sweet apples, plus vanilla and wood putty. The palate features lots of succulent soft fruits, milk chocolate, honey, and spice. The finish is medium in length, and spicy chocolate notes persist. £55 
      		
 
			
 
The Balvenie continues its limited edition releases of 17 year old whiskies. Previous editions included an Islay Cask finish and a New Oak finish. This is the newest one, aged in sherry oak casks. It’s a delicious whisky, with clean, ripe, sherried fruit marrying nicely with the dry oak spices. Notes of apple pie, honeyed summer fruit, caramel toasted almonds, and toffee, with dry resinous oak on the finish to round out the sweetness. A big, full-bodied Balvenie that satisfies. 

      		
 
			
 
The darkness of the hue of this, the second official release of a 40 year old from Balvenie, gives an indication of how intense the relationship between cask and spirit has been over its long sequestration. It emerges brimming with dense aromas such as tamarind paste, treacle, and Black Forest gateau. Amazingly, on the palate there’s a lift of vanilla-like sweetness before the heavier and drier elements close down on the finish. Incredibly limited; only 150 bottles produced. £2,500
      		
 
			
 
Light gold, with good intensity and a more noticeable malty note than is common with this distillery, as well as touches of daffodil and dried honeycomb. The wood influence appears minimal to start with, but more vanilla creeps through in time; water brings out almond milk. Opens into clementine peel, pomelo, then cooked dessert apple. The palate is clean and forward; even slightly hot when neat. Remarkably assertive for a 25 year old.
      		
 
			
 
This 2014 bottling of Ben Nevis illustrates how good the single malt can be with robust sherry cask maturation. Distilled in June 1998, it was filled into a fresh sherry butt and matured for 15 years before 582 bottles were released. Raisins, prunes, old polished leather, and roasted meat on the nose. The body is full, with the palate offering succulent dark berries, dates, raisins, and plain chocolate. Long and spicy in the finish, with cloves and rum raisin-flavored dark chocolate. £92
      		
 
			
 
Though sounding more like a character out of Asterix than a whisky, Authenticus is the code for the peated arm of the ever-expanding BenRiach portfolio. It’s the smoke that you notice first, typically Highland-style wood smoke with a light aromatic lift akin to smoked meat. It’s not a bludgeoning smoke however, because BenRiach’s inherent orchard fruit sweetness is there alongside touches of beeswax. In other words, it has maturity. The key here is balance and harmony. £124
      		
 
			
 
This whisky combines the finer qualities of both the 18 year old and the 25 year old. It expresses the balance and purity of the 18 year old, while showing maturity found in the 25 year old. The lack of chill-filtering enhances the whisky’s vibrancy and, like all the Benromachs, it’s mouth-coatingly thick and malty. 

-> On page 89 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The first 10 year old release containing whisky produced entirely by the new owners. I love the interplay here between the malt, sherry, and smoke, with all getting a chance to shine. A rich vanilla-tinged malty foundation, deep caramel, 
, an array of lush fruit and dark chocolate, along with grassy/hay notes, honeysuckle, subtle spice (cinnamon, anise), and lingering earthy smoke. A vast improvement from the “Origins” release last year. I would only make three changes to make this whisky even better (and elevate it to 90+ status): a couple more years on oak, bottling at 46%, and not chill-filtering it. Still, this is one of the best efforts from this distillery. Well done!

      		
 
			
 
Gold color. Citrus zest aromas and creamy sweet notes-reminiscent of lemon meringue pie-with subtle tropical fruit and marshmallow notes dancing throughout. This whisky has great balance and is fully mature at 12 yrs., which should be no surprise for a Lowland whisky. The palate delivers what the aroma promises, with a touch of honey up front, citrus and vanilla in the middle, and a delicate dryness on the finish.

   Style: Lowland single malt scotch. Price: approx. mid $70s. Limited availability. 

   I've always admired Bladnoch-a whisky that needs to be better known-and this expression reinforces my opinion.
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in Scotland’s most southerly distillery of Bladnoch in October 1992, this bottling has been matured in a refill hogshead, and 150 bottles have been allocated to the U.S. It presents a fresh nose, with initial herbal notes, turning to cornflakes and newly-mown hay. Sweet and fruity on the palate, with oat biscuits and milk chocolate. The finish is relatively short, with spicy custard, then a final fruit flourish. 
      		
 
			
 
The first Tempest to be imported to the U.S. Aged exclusively in first-fill bourbon casks. With the bourbon cask, and relatively young age, you can really feel all the Islay love. Bracing, with plenty of sea character, along with honeyed vanilla, citrus, floral notes (especially lavender), rumbling peat smoke, tobacco, and resinous oak on the finish.  A bit steep in price for a 10 year old, but very dynamic.
      		
 
			
 
A sweet start, then a sudden blast of fresh, menthol-like toothpaste (pleasant) before it dips into slightly decaying soft fruits (again, nice), a mashy note, then violet-accented smoke. Water adds some elegance and weight. This sweetness continues on the palate, where there’s toffee, raisin, ripe fruits, and slow-burning peatiness, fully integrated and ember-like on the back palate. The finish is all hot peppered mackerel. Recommended. (
)
      		
 
			
 
Pale gold/straw color. Fresh, appetizing aroma and flavor of brine, delicate peat, gentle sweetness, and a touch of spice and seaweed. Medium in body and slightly oily in texture. Nicely balanced and clean, with a salty, dryish finish.

   Style: northern Highland single malt scotch. Price: low $60s. Limited availability nationwide. 

   This is a lovely, very appetizing expression of a distillery that has been closed and dismantled. (It was the original Clynelish distillery.) It is a very nice example of a northern Highland whisky, and expresses a great balance between sweetness and brine, youth and maturity. However, I would have liked to have seen it bottled at a higher strength.
      		
 
			
 
Part of an ongoing series, and the first appearance of Port Charlotte. This ain’t shy. Assertive with banana, roasted red pepper, paprika, and a hit of barbecued pork glazed with pomegranate molasses. The palate has blazing heat, but also oiliness and real density. The peat doesn’t so much rumble as sit there in a cloud: opaque, impenetrable. Even water cannot unlock it. Rooty and tarry, this is not a dram for the fainthearted. £65 (500 ml)
      		
 
			
 
Peated whiskies definitely have a dropping off point where they become too old and tired, and the nose for this one would indicate it’s past its prime, with gravel, rubbery smoke, and raisin. On the palate it’s a different story, as ashy smoke combines with raisin and 
, turning the peat age detriment into an asset. Strangely alluring, it’s like sitting on a park bench next to a weathered old man who ends up having a real tale to tell.  (
)
      		
 
			
 
Like the Clynelish 14 year old also reviewed in this issue, it is nice to see Diageo finally introduce official distillery bottlings of Caol Ila here in the U.S. (after being available in the UK for many years now). My suitcases were getting quite heaving on my return trips from Scotland. This is a splendid Coal Ila. It is wonderfully vibrant. Understandably, the immediate impact on the palate is the peat smoke, but there's so much else going on here, too: smoked olives, seaweed, salt and pepper, all placed on a gently sweet bed of toffee and vanilla fudge. Lingering smoke, olives, and seaweed on the finish.
      		
 
			
 
Amber gold color. An exciting aroma-classic Islay. It is very phenolic, reminiscent of standing downwind of a peat kiln. Interwoven spice (especially pepper), seaweed, and sweet & sour notes add complexity. Light to medium in body, but quite oily. Nicely balanced flavors of peat smoke, seaweed, salt & pepper, all wrapped up in a gentle sweetness. Lingering peat smoke and spice on the finish.

   Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: low $80s. Limited availability. 

   Yet another example of Caol Ila's fine pedigree. This bottling has great balance, and I especially enjoy how the smoke and sweetness marry together. My only criticism is that it is a bit soft for Caol Ila. I would love to try this whisky at 46 or 50% ABV, which would give it a bit more guts.
-> On page 90 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
A rounded and mature affair. The 25 years in oak has made it a bit more refined (and drier on the palate) compared to younger expressions. All the classic Caol Ila notes are stillthere-mustard, seaweed, olives, damp peat, salt and pepper. A touch of vanilla wafer, anise, smoked almonds, and tarry rope add complexity. Those of you who prefer Ardbeg 17 over the 10, and Laphroaig 15 over the 10, will be attracted to this whisky when compared to Caol Ila's younger siblings. But at $225, it's an expensive date, isn't it?
      		
 
			
 
Bottled in 2004 and still in circulation. A very traditional Caol Ila. Not a heavy-bodied whisky, but it throws a strong punch. Notes of tarry rope infused with seaweed and brine, all on an oily, malty, vanilla foundation. Throw in some orchard fruit, Manzanilla olive, black licorice stick, and soot, with brine and Tellicherry pepper on the finish. Clean, fun, and dynamic.

      		
 
			
 
Caol Ila makes unpeated whisky for blenders, but it rarely gets bottled as a single malt. Here’s a very revealing opportunity to find out what Caol Ila tastes like without the smoke. Good viscosity and rather sweet, showing thick, honeyed vanilla, gobs of fruit (lemon drops, lime tart, ripe Bartlett pear, kiwi), mint jelly, and cut grass. Its sea influence finally emerges towards the finish with brine and just a hint of seaweed. Bruichladdich and Bunnahabhain are now bottling peated whiskies, and Caol Ila does just the opposite. This is an interesting diversion, but I am missing the added dimension of peat smoke in this Caol Ila.

      		
 
			
 
This is to be a permanent addition to the core Caol Ila range, but it will raise a few eyebrows, completely ignoring the current peat battle between Ardbeg and Bruichladdich and heading off into an altogether more refined and delicate direction. This is a dignified and complex malt, which doesn’t give everything up immediately. There’s soft pear and guava on the nose, and the trademark oiliness and distinctive peat are there, but there’s a buttery quality, too, as well as some brine and spice, apple pip, and traces of aniseed. You get a sense of its age late on, with some oaky tannins and sharper spice, but overall this is an unhurried, complex, and sweet whisky with just enough peat to keep it honest. Very impressive. (Limited general releases, excluding the U.S.) 
      		
 
			
 
Unusual, insofar as this is the one chance a year that drinkers get to try Caol Ila’s other expression: the unpeated version, which — and here’s a bit of history for you — helped save the distillery during the lean period of the whisky loch in the early 80s. Rather than this just being Caol Ila with the peat stripped out, the team made  it in a different fashion — but there are still hints of commonality. 
For example, the grassy note that usually lies beneath the smoke is the lead aroma here, and it’s not any old grass, but wet grass — like skidding on a football (soccer) field. The mind keeps looking for smoke, but apart from a hint of birch smoke (which could come from the (refill) cask), it’s whistle-clean and fruity, and with a touch of water, fills with an aroma of toffee popcorn, custard, and pears. 
The palate continues in this light fashion with melon balls and fruit cocktail. This potentially bland fleshiness is given a perkiness thanks to the high alcohol and, again, a jag of acidity. Bizarrely, on the finish, I pick up slight saltiness. A fun dram. 
      		
 
			
 
Caperdonich is always a challenge to find. This one is aged in a sherry cask. One would fear that slumbering away for 35 years in a sherry cask would completely dominate this whisky’s profile. Not this whisky. As you would expect, it is nicely matured, but it is surprisingly clean and well rounded, too! Exotic notes of dried fruits, sultana, subtle (but viscous) honey, sandalwood, and a potpourri of spice (especially cinnamon, anise, ginger). Clean, subtly spicy finish. Slowly sip and savor its delicate pleasures. 

      		
 
			
 
Darkness! is a range of cask strength single malts which have been finished for 3 months in 50-liter first-fill 
 or 
 casks. Waxy on the nose, with dates, prunes, cherries, cocoa powder, window polish, and finally vanilla. Warm and spicy on the palate, with sweet sherry, hot chocolate, intense tropical fruit notes, and cloves. The fruit becomes more citric in the finish; nutty, with clove oil. £75
      		
 
			
 
This Clynelish is notable as the first no age statement Special Release, and maturation took place in refill European and bodega European oak casks, along with first-fill, refill, and rejuvenated American oak casks. The nose is fresh and salty, with olives, pine, and lemongrass, then fruit notes ranging from citric to sweet. Oily on the palate, with those same citric and sweet fruits as the nose, plus cayenne pepper and vanilla. Spicy citrus fruits in the drying finish.
      		
 
			
 
Those who are fond of ripe, sherried whiskies will enjoy this new 15 year old. It’s aged entirely in sherry casks. The sherry is nicely layered (but not sappy or cloying) and the Dalmore spirit is big enough to handle it. Lush fruit, richly textured and fleshy, with a warming spice impact on the finish. Orange marmalade, glazed citrus, and key lime pie are enveloped by sweet toffee/molasses notes, and spiced with cinnamon, clove, ginger, and subtle chocolate. Soothing and restorative in nature. Good for after dinner -- or with a cigar.
      		
 
			
 
Master Blender Richard Paterson’s excellent adventure. This whisky consists of Dalmore aged in a wide variety of casks, including cabernet sauvignon, madeira, Matusalem sherry, marsala, port, and bourbon. This diversity shows in the whisky’s complexity and unique flavor profile. There’s a lot going on in here. Very rich, but balanced with oak spice and gripping resin (especially on the finish). Sweet layers of toffee, molasses, and vanilla fudge provide a foundation for red plum, ripe red raspberry, black cherry, blueberry, orange marmalade, kiwi, grape skin, and toasted almond. A very busy whisky which requires a good dose of mental participation to really appreciate it and sort all the flavors out. In this regard, very much like Glenmorangie Signet.
-> On page 91 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The Dalmore Cromartie was distilled in 1996 and has been matured in oloroso sherry casks. The release is limited to 7,500 bottles.  A floral nose with cocoa powder and warm leather, along with hand-rolling tobacco and gingery, citrus notes. Rich and elegant sherry notes on the palate, with soft, smoky treacle and dark chocolate-covered orange candy.  The finish is long and spicy, majoring on cinnamon, with more dark chocolate, overripe orange, and a hint of licorice. £100
      		
 
			
 
Lush and fruity-the sherry cask aging is obvious-and it is balanced beautifully by the dry, spicy oak notes. Through all this, there’s inviting notes of ginger, raisin, and a whiff of peat. One of the best Glen Ord whiskies I’ve tasted. 

      		
 
			
 
The latest single cask expression of 1991 Glen Scotia from Wemyss Malts has been matured for 22 years in a sherry butt, which yielded 807 bottles. The nose provides sherry and cigar boxes, cherries, sultanas, raisins, orange peel, plum pudding, and finally warm leather. Full bodied, with sherry on the palate, plus brine, dried fruit, bitter coffee, and polished old, dark oak. Medium to long in the fruity finish, with salt, plain chocolate, and wood polish notes. £105
      		
 
			
 
The first single cask release of GlenDronach for the U.S. by the new owners, and a nice one at that. Silky in texture, polished, and clean on the palate, with light toffee, treacle, cherry bonbon, orange-soaked date nut cake, and chocolate-covered raisin. Never cloying, like some heavily-sherried whiskies can be. Silky, soothing finish. Surprisingly soft and youthful for its age. (A Park Avenue Liquor exclusive.)
      		
 
			
 
A refill sherry hoggie has given a classic walnut color, and indeed notes of that nut as well. Here’s Glenfarclas at its most dense, with savory, sun-dried tomato-like edges and sandalwood. The mouth is elegant with a little heat, the sherry giving roasted almond, sweet plump dried fruits, and dried flowers. Water brings out lightly gripping tannins (but, again, not aggressively) and good layering. Similar to the ’87. £285
      		
 
			
 
Glenglassaugh initially imported Massandra wine casks from the Crimea in 2010 for finishing purposes, and that was the first time the winery had allowed its wood to be exported. In 2014, two Massandra cask finishes were released. Distilled in 1978, the Madeira-finished nose yields dates, sultanas, stewed fruit, caramel, a hint of smoke, and spices. Smooth on the palate, with apricots, cocoa powder, oak, and lots of spice development. The softly-oaked finish is lengthy, citric, and spicy. £395
      		
 
			
 
Probably the most highly-regarded malt in the regular Glengoyne lineup, the 17 year old represents a direct progression from its younger siblings. According to the distillers, “The balance has artfully changed. A more concentrated palate of flavors has emerged…” Citrus and cedar notes on the slightly grassy nose, with a hint of plain chocolate. Medium in body, with more plain chocolate notes, plus raisins, orange, vanilla, and malt. Lengthy in the finish, with milky coffee, sherry, leather, and citrus spice. 
      		
 
			
 
This variant of Glengoyne replaces the popular 17 year old as part of an overhaul of the core range, and the maturation regime has included what the distillers describe as “a generous proportion of first-fill sherry casks.” Milk chocolate, vanilla, melon, and grapefruit on the nose, with burgeoning dry sherry and fruitcake. The palate is rich and well rounded, with cinnamon and ginger, almonds, orange marmalade, sweeter sherry, and caramel. Lingering spices and easy-going oak in the lengthy finish.  £70
      		
 
			
 
Very fragrant. Spicy too, with notes of honeyed vanilla, peaches in cream, butterscotch, cinnamon, licorice (red and black), light nuttiness, and toasted oak on the finish. Nice mouthfeel, well-balanced, and quite rich for such an elegant whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Deep gold color. Exotic aroma of tropical fruit (coconut, pineapple), vanilla, and honey. Medium bodied and firm. On the palate: honey, vanilla, and tropical fruit up front, becoming dry, with subtly complex spice notes. Deep, dry, lingering finish. 

-> On page 92 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Lively on the nose for its age (and on the palate too -- the tell-tale oak emerges only towards the end). Notes of creamy vanilla, barley sugar, coconut, pineapple, and general citrus notes throughout. Dried spices (especially cinnamon) kick in mid-palate and continue into a lengthy, dry, polished oak finish.
      		
 
			
 
Once again Lorne Mackillop demonstrates his talent for selecting whiskies with beautiful balance. This time it’s with a well-aged Glenlivet. Sure, it shows many of the notes that I often find in Glenlivet (Speyside elegance, peachy vanilla, tropical fruit, floral and honeyed-malt notes), but I’m also picking up more subtle notes: dark chocolate, licorice root, dark fruit, perhaps even charcoal (especially on the finish), making the whisky a bit more complex and curiously attractive.
      		
 
			
 
Deep gold color. This whisky is finished off in new oak, and it certainly shows. There are lots of complex wood spices in this whisky, and it is intensely deep and mature for such a young age. There’s a firmness to the whisky that’s very appealing. It is exciting too, with notes of toasted oak, vanilla, and a hint of dark chocolate. 

      		
 
			
 
This is unlike any Glenmorangie I’ve ever tasted. It’s a very textural, visceral whisky -- partly due to the chocolate malt, partly due to the casks used. It’s dark in color for a Glenmorangie, and viscous on the palate, with interwoven notes of dark chocolate, ground coffee, pot still rum, and spice (cinnamon, nutmeg), followed by dry polished leather, tobacco leaf, and a roasted walnut finish. This is a fun whisky, and earns bonus points for being unique in flavor. But I think its dry, slightly assertive finish detracts from what otherwise is a thrilling, dynamic journey.
      		
 
			
 
Glenmorangie enters the world of peated whiskies (like everyone else these days it seems — not that I’m complaining). Richly textured layers of sweetness (vanilla, toffee, milk chocolate), fruit (tangerine, orchard fruit — especially ripe cherry), roasted nuts, wild morels, a hint of menthol, and gentle smoke. Certainly entertaining, even if the whisky doesn’t always seem to know what it wants to be. The soft sweetness mid-palate is balanced nicely by dried spice and smoke on the finish. Curiously enjoyable. 
      		
 
			
 
Previously offered as a 12 year old, it now has an extra three years of secondary maturation, after a decade in ex-bourbon casks. The ‘finishing’ casks are ex-Sauternes barriques. Lemonade, icing sugar, vanilla, nougat, and maple on the nose. Progressively sweeter. Rich and sweet on the palate, notably fruity, with spicy orange and brittle toffee. Medium length finish, with milk chocolate-coated ginger and lingering toffee. £39
      		
 
			
 
Artein is the third release in Glenmorangie’s Private Edition range, with ‘artein’ being Gaelic for stone. The expression comprises two-thirds 15 year old and one-third 21 year old whisky, finished in ‘Super Tuscan’ wine casks. Briefly pear drops, then vanilla on the nose, with developing peaches and apricots, shot through with mild ginger. Viscous, mouth-coating, intense, dark fruits, spice, aniseed, and late onset of cloves and blackcurrant cough medicine on the palate. The finish is fruity, long, and herbal.
      		
 
			
 
The newest expression from the 1990s. Heavier, richer, and more ripe that the 1987 Vintage reviewed above. It is very creamy and mouth-coating, with layers of sweetness (vanilla, caramel, light toffee, white chocolate), fruit (sultana, plum), along with a good underpinning of oak spice. A very nice effort for a whisky this young. 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Speyside single malt scotch Color: Amber gold Aroma: Full and creamy. Floral, honey, fruit gum drops. Palate: Rich and mouth-coating. Clean. Nicely balanced. Notes of vanilla, honey, and assorted fruits up front, followed by spicy oak notes, with a dried fruit finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Richer, thicker, and more lush than the 1975 vintage reviewed here. Fallen orchard fruit, sticky toffee pudding, and nuts, with underlying suggestions of date cake. Emerging dried spice and oak resin towards the finish. A good contrast to the 1975 vintage.

-> On page 93 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The nose is redolent with the smells of autumn jam — slowly stewing dark berry fruits — but there’s a hint of hazelnut adding a drier edge alongside some waxed paper. As it opens, out comes argan oil. This constantly changing array of aromas is very Glenrothes, as is the vanilla lift when water is added, which comes with added cordite. The palate is very sweet, filled with fruit syrups and even some dried rose petal. The finish, long. £79
      		
 
			
 
The hue is deep amber and the nose is equally resonant and rich. This is Glenrothes in its most muscular guise, so that while you have the normal layers of fruity complexity, there is an extra weight. Think of citrus peels, sticky dates, walnuts, and fruit leather. The palate is soft and rolling with light tannin. For me, it’s at its best au naturel.
      		
 
			
 
As befits an elder of the church, this has a serious attitude, which with the youngest component being 18 years old isn’t a surprise. Full-bodied, but with elegance, not bludgeoning power, this is a refined Rothes: malted barley, creamy oak, oxidative depths. Sweet with stewed plums and red fruit. The palate is unctuous with little hints of geranium and becomes slightly funky with water, though I’d go neat to get the full effect of bitter orange and sweet honeycomb.
€99
      		
 
			
 
The youngest of the Manse Brae triumvirate, and also the freshest. Here is Rothes at its liveliest, with sweet cereal and the typical spiciness of the distillery undercut by citrus peels, dessert apples, and hot malted milk. On the tongue it is quite delicate, but it is how it behaves mid-palate which is the killer, just stopping and allowing the fruits to liquefy in the center of the tongue. Fantastic price as well.
€40
      		
 
			
 
Richly sherried, great mouthfeel, and well-balanced. The sherry is clean, and is only one facet of this multi-dimensional whisky. Notes of lush orange and apricot, soaked in molasses and maple syrup. Fig cake and oak resin add structure and complexity. Dry, spicy cinnamon, resinous finish. (Bottled for Delilah’s, and for Bull and Bush) 

      		
 
			
 
Honey, creamy vanilla, caramel, sultana, and toasted almond along with a hint of lemon gum drops and banana. Quite floral, too -- lavender, heather -- with a gentle, lingering finish. A very soothing, mouth-coating whisky with excellent balance, while still quite fresh. Indeed, a very more-ish whisky -- and sneaky in how it grows on you with each sip.
      		
 
			
 
Pear drops, green apples, lots of toffee, and more spice on the nose than in the Sigurd expression; also fresher and fruitier. Voluptuous mouthfeel, with sherry, toffee, vanilla, nutmeg, and a wisp of fragrant smoke. Toffee remains in the finish, with notes of cocoa powder, smoky oak, and citrus spice. Very well balanced.(
€400
      		
 
			
 
Like “Superstition,” this is a peated expression of Jura. Compared to Superstition, Prophecy seems richer, heavier, sweeter, deeper, leafier, with more tarry notes. I’m also picking up more spice (cinnamon, anise, dark chocolate) and some fruit (lime, mandarin orange, green apple), with a subtle yet intriguing suggestion of burnt popcorn. Prophecy is also bottled at 46% and not chill-filtered—which I think brings out more subtle nuances and texture in the whisky. The only tradeoff is that I’m picking up less of the Jura spirit and less sea characteristics. But this is a small tradeoff, considering how much more you’re getting with Prophecy. Promoted as a limited annual release.
      		
 
			
 
This expression of Jura is by leading London wine and spirits merchant Berry Bros. & Rudd, and was bottled in the company’s Berry’s Own range at 35 years of age after maturation in sherry hogshead #889. The nose offers sweet sherry and caramel, sultanas, cinnamon, and rum baba, with an elusive wisp of smoke. Full-bodied, very fruity on the palate, with mixed spices, pine cones, and old sherry notes. The finish is long, nutty, and luxurious. £200
      		
 
			
 
An elder Lagavulin. Thirty years of oak aging has mellowed this whisky. Fragrant and floral, with suggestions of perfumed soap. Spicy too, with cinnamon and anise. Classic leafy, smoky notes, along with some tarry rope, emerge on the palate and maintain a steady keel as they work their way through an ocean of vanilla malt. Lingering finish of burning embers. Certainly an enjoyable Lagavulin, but I still like the standard 16 year old better. It’s hard to improve on a classic. 

-> On page 94 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Straw gold color. Peat smoke, damp earth, seaweed, balanced by a maple syrup sweetness on the nose and palate. Full-bodied and firm in body. Flavors are pleasantly mature and nicely integrated. 

      		
 
			
 
It’s a brave person who tries to persuade a malt like Lagavulin to go into a different direction. Indeed, even PX casks, from the sweetest fortified wine of all, can’t fully obscure the distillery’s character, just give it a raisined coating. The creosote turns to tar and licorice, while there’s Syrah-like sootiness, and damson. This release is slightly less sweet than in the past and is the better for it, though I still prefer my Lagavulin relatively ‘naked.’
      		
 
			
 
Pungent and medicinal in personality, with gobs of peat, tar, iodine, brine, and seaweed. These are all good things.in case you were wondering. A gentle vanilla sweetness tries to tame this savage beast, but it is no match. One of the most challenging-yet rewarding-whiskies in the entire world. What Cantillion Lambic is to beer, Laphroaig Original Cask Strength is to whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Pale gold color. Bold aromas of sweet wort, seaweed, and peat bonfires. Medium bodied and slightly oily in texture. Malty sweet flavors up front, followed by peat and seaweed, then taken over by a huge rush of peat smoke that never seems to end. A sweetness stays with the whisky throughout to help balance the peat smoke. 

      		
 
			
 
Also known as St. Magdalene, this Lowland distillery which closed down for good in 1983 is becoming increasingly more difficult to find. And when one does become available, it will be pushing 20 years old or older, like this one. When young, Linlithgow often exhibits a freshness and drinkability, with a gentle maltiness and often hay or grassy notes for complexity. How does this older one fare? Quite well, actually. I was concerned that this whisky would have too much oak influence, given how old it is and how delicate the whisky can be. While those years in a hogshead add some dry spicy notes, they are never excessive. Instead, they add a complexity that blends in nicely with notes of creamy malt, vanilla, lemon gum drops, grass and hay. I am particularly impressed by the evolution of flavors on the palate and the length and depth of its dry, spicy finish. Certainly one of the best Linlithgows to come onto the market. 

      		
 
			
 
One of the better bottlings from this Lowland distillery which closed in 1983. Velvety and slightly oily in texture, and fragrant. The whisky is balanced, the flavors clean, with no hint of excessive oak. Bourbon cask-aging offers up notes of vanilla wafer, along with coconut cream, honey, and a touch of caramel. Bright fruit (lemon meringue, pineapple, apricot) keeps the whisky lively, and suggestions of hay and linseed offer continued entertainment. Nutty, toasted oak finish. If you are looking for a Linlithgow (AKA St. Magdalene) to purchase before the whisky becomes impossible to find, I can recommend this one. 

      		
 
			
 
White wine color. Sweet aromas of confectioner’s sugar, toasted marshmallow, honey, and coconut. Its flavors mirror its aroma, with a pleasing creamy, almost buttery, texture and soft, gentle finish. 

      		
 
			
 
This 11 year old bottling of Longrow from Springbank distillery was matured for seven years in refill bourbon casks before being filled into cabernet sauvignon hogsheads for a final four years. 9,000 bottles are available. The nose offers buttery smoked haddock, coal tar soap, citrus fruit, and new leather, with background notes of soft peat. Mouth coating, with rich peat on the palate, plus fruity spice and developing licorice notes. Long in the finish, with persistent peat smoke and, finally, red currants. £50
      		
 
			
 
Quite fresh and lively for its age and loaded with fruit. You’ll find bright fruit (tangerine, passion fruit, lemon) followed by subtle, sweeter fruit (coconut, honeydew melon, banana, and apple crumb pie). Resinous, minty oak notes and a hefty viscosity give the whisky some structure, while floral notes (lavender, rose petals) and gentle vanilla expose a softer side to the whisky. Dry, oak finish. 

      		
 
			
 
The whisky is quite fruity (green grape, orange, tangerine, and dark cherry), with balancing notes of vanilla, roasted nuts, and a hint of peat. Dry, lightly spicy finish that lingers. It is complex and nicely balanced for a whisky of this age. Still, I feel the 15 year old Fine Oak edition is better and, at $65, one-tenth the cost. 

-> On page 95 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
When approached from light to rich, you can see how the driver of the range is oxidation rather than just the addition of wood. Here are stewed black cherries, red plums, and blueberries, but with the purity and freshness of Amber and Gold. The mental image is of a country house in autumn: clay on boots, candle wax, resin, allspice, peels, those perfumed fruits, and the whiff of an artist’s palette. The tannins are supple. Best with water on the side. £66
      		
 
			
 
Bottled as 350 ml twin-pack along with the American oak version, this is deeply resinous, with clove, shoe leather, high-grade engine oil—an Aston Martin workshop, not a back alley garage—alongside dried
fruits. Similar in tone to some old Caribbean rums with liqueur chocolate and Friar’s Balsam. The tannins yield slightly, showing chicory and raisin. ‘Old style’ Macallan, and another which, while strong, is best neat. £350 (one of two 350 ml bottles)
      		
 
			
 
This whisky shows the true potential of Mortlach -- and at a youthful age, too! Quite fragrant and very complex on the nose and palate. Chewy toffee with almonds, vanilla fudge, ripe barley, and nougat, with underlying pit fruits, dried spice, and a hint of leather on the finish. Very fulfilling.
      		
 
			
 
This is the second travel retail-exclusive expression of Old Pulteney to use the registration of a Wick fishing vessel in its name, in this case the Isabella Fortuna, a herring drifter dating from 1890. This expression bears no age statement and was matured in bourbon casks. Floral and fragrant on the nose, with honey, vanilla, zest of lemon, and a hint of salt. The palate features fresh fruit salad, coconut, and sherbet liveliness. Summery. Medium length in the spicy finish. £35 (1 liter)
      		
 
			
 
WK217 is the latest in Pulteney’s Travel Retail-exclusive range of releases named after the registrations of fishing vessels. This expression has been matured in a mix of Spanish and American oak sherry butts. Fig rolls, black treacle, sultanas, and a hint of cinnamon on the nose. Finally, milk chocolate. Smooth and oily on the palate, with soft spices, before deeper and darker sherry notes arrive. The finish is relatively long, with sherry and spice, then final spiky licorice notes. £40 (liter)
      		
 
			
 
Navigator honors Old Pulteney’s seafaring heritage and promotional links with matters marine. The expression carries no age statement, is non-chill filtered, and has been matured in a mixture of bourbon and sherry casks. The nose features vanilla, sherry, American cream soda, ginger, orange peel, and cocoa powder. Complex. Mouth-tingling spices: ginger and nutmeg on the palate, with more oranges, and cocoa. Dries slowly, slightly powdery, with persistent citrus fruit, and a hint of brine. Value Pick.
      		
 
			
 
An unusual vintage bottling of Old Pulteney, in that maturation occurred in a mix of American bourbon casks and Spanish sherry casks that previously held heavily-peated whisky. The nose opens with a whiff of ozone; then lemon, vanilla, and coconut appear, along with fleeting wood smoke. Intense tropical fruitiness merges with milk chocolate, lemon sorbet, and lively spices on the palate. Spicy milk chocolate with a citric and softly peaty tang in the finish.
      		
 
			
 
Old Pulteney’s 40 year old comprises spirit from three sherry hogsheads and one bourbon barrel. Just 493 bottles of the distillery’s oldest expression to date have been released, offered at cask strength and not chill filtered. The nose is soft and fragrant, with peaches in syrup, toffee, cinnamon, and aerosol wood polish. Early intense orchard fruits on the palate, then nutmeg, cinnamon and black coffee. Long in the finish, with spicy oak tannins and Seville orange. Notably drying.
      		
 
			
 
This refill sherry butt-matured, cask strength variant of the Lowland classic Rosebank was distilled in December 1990. Floral and fruity on the nose. Sweet, with malt and black cherries, plus a hint of new leather. Quite viscous in the mouth; nutmeg, dark chocolate, and toffee on the palate. Walnuts and background dry sherry. The finish offers gentle oak and lots of spice.
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in 1992, a year before Rosebank fell silent, this 21 year old expression was matured in refill American oak casks. 4,530 bottles have been released. The fragrant nose yields milk chocolate, peaches, apricots, nutmeg, and toffee bonbons. Spicy and mildly herbal on the palate, with icing sugar and a suggestion of dark chocolate. The finish is medium in length, fruity, with gentle spice, coffee, and developing oaky dryness.
-> On page 96 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Very powerful and quite different from the 10 year old, 46% bottling reviewed below; this tastes as if it is taken entirely from bourbon oak-aged Springbank. There’s fresh brine, creamy vanilla, honey, and coconut throughout, and it lacks the waxed fruit nature of its sibling. Mouthcoating in texture, with a long appetizing briny finish. Very clean -- and quite polished too, for such a powerful whisky. My choice of the three.
      		
 
			
 
Nice to see stocks distilled after the 1980s ‘silent period’ turning 18 years old. The sherry influence here is complementary, but not overpowering. Notes of toffee almond, vanilla fudge, chocolate-coated citrus, bramble, and candied ginger. Polished leather, dried spice, and a hint of brine on the finish dries it out nicely and keeps it interesting. Not quite as dynamic and complex as some of those legendary pre-1980s Springers, but it’s smooth, well-rounded, and more-ish.
      		
 
			
 
A good dose of sherry here, but there’s plenty of Springbank character coming through too! Gobs of ripe, red berried fruit (strawberry, rhubarb, red currant, raspberry), especially on the nose, along with raisin. It’s all on a bed of blueberry pancakes, toffee, and fig cake. Coconut and brine emerge occasionally on the palate and linger on the finish. A very nice whisky, although I wonder what it would taste like with just a little less sherry influence?
      		
 
			
 
A round of single cask Springers matured completely (not finished) in various wine casks for the U.S. market. All four are solid efforts — it’s really a matter of personal preference. A general comment: most of the single cask releases are matured in some sort of wine or rum cask. While this is nice, I would love to see several single cask, cask strength, and fully-matured ex-bourbon barrel bottlings offered for a change. 

The freshest of the bunch, chock full of Springbank character. Light and lively. Floral, with plenty of fruit (green grapes, kiwi, apple tart) on a bed of honeyed malt. Nuttiness and brine emerge toward the finish, and linger. 
      		
 
			
 
Springbank has released a limited edition of 9,000 bottles of whisky distilled in November 2001, matured in small casks (traditionally known as rundlets or kilderkins), and bottled in January 2012. The small casks have left an impression of accelerated maturity, with coal smoke, cloves, young oak, and caramel on the rich nose. The palate is big and bold, with a sprinkling of salt, then more youthful wood, milk chocolate, and honey, while the finish is long and slightly tarry. £57
      		
 
			
 
This is the seventh batch of 12 year old cask strength Springbank to appear, being bottled early in 2014. Some of the component whisky was matured in 
 sherry casks. The nose blends maritime notes with Christmas cake fruits, vanilla pods, and overt sherry. Viscous in the mouth, with cowsheds and soft peat smoke, plus spice, caramel, and a hint of sweet sherry. The no-holds-barred finish presents a big blast of smoke, root ginger, and freshly-dug peat. £45
      		
 
			
 
Very similar in flavor profile to the Tomintoul 16, reviewed below, but better. The longer aging has provided extra character and depth. Also, on the palate, the caramel flavors are a bit darker (bordering on toffee) and the whisky’s finish is longer and a shade drier. It has aged gracefully, with no excessive woodiness. A whisky that reveals its charm slowly and subtly. 

      		
 
			
 
The subtle sherry adds an additional level of complexity when compared to the standard 10 year old, taking Tomintoul to a new level. Rich and creamy, with well-balanced notes of toffee, vanilla fudge, toasted nuts, and elegant fruit. A surprisingly delicious whisky for 12 years old.

      		
 
			
 
A new, beefed-up version of the 18 year old, with a higher alcohol level and (seemingly) more sherry influence. I must say that I really enjoyed the previous expression, rating it an 87 for its roundness and elegance. I like this one too, and its bold demeanor. Whether you like it or its predecessor comes down to preference and mood. Notes of toffee apple, pancakes drizzled with maple syrup, date nut cake, ripe fruit, and roasted nuts, all dusted with cinnamon, vanilla, and cocoa.
      		
 
			
 
Aged in a refill sherry puncheon, and the sherry is evident in appearance and on the palate. Soft and sweet, with caramel-coated mixed nuts, toffee apple, rhum agricole, currant (red and black), plum, cinnamon, and surprising brisk mint (especially toward the finish). A pleasing, non-aggressive expression of a mature, sherried whisky. (Not available in the U.S.)£340
-> On page 97 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Youthful and very lively. Bold, crisp, spices (mint, cinnamon, vanilla) are softened by soothing, sweeter notes (candied fruit, coconut, caramel, and rum notes), becoming dry, flinty, and spicy on the finish. It is very clean and polished, and it is superior to other rye whiskeys in this age range. Nicely done! 

      		
 
			
 
Mackmyra has at long last reached the United States. It has been a growing force for some years, and is now a stocky adolescent with a personality all its own. What was challenging, salty peat is now in check, and the fruity delights are to the fore, with canned sweet pear, vanilla, cherry blossom, and lacquer on the nose. There’s a flip-flop on the palate, from melon and vanilla to dusty, peppery peat in the finish. 
      		
 
			
 
This is the whisky equivalent of Metallica playing country songs. You can feel the power of the malt, you know it can kick out hard if it wants to. But it's all wrapped up in Kentucky finery, the sweet bourbon candy and vanilla notes offsetting the salt and pepper, and some mint leaf and berry fruits to send it on its way. It's not an entirely comfortable pairing, but by far the best of this bunch. SEK 1195
      		
 
			
 
It’s well possible that this will be the last of the Special range, and if so, then it is both a bit of a whisper of an ending, and a highly pleasant one. This is as easygoing and gentle as Mackmyra ever gets. Very much a sweet and savory delight, this is a soft dessert whisky with banana and cream in evidence. That’s before someone pours the salt pot over it. Even then the caramel and fruit battle back. Highly enjoyable.
      		
 
			
 
Solsken comprises a parcel of smaller sherry and Swedish oak casks hand-picked by master blender Angela D’Orazio. The nose is like a basket of hot breakfast pastries, with honeycomb, tinned peaches, cinnamon, and hot teacakes with singed edges smoking from the grill. An amazing, golden taste that’s warm and soothing; sucked lozenges, mandarin segments, tame spices, and cobnut. The strength of the alcohol remains veiled in the shadows until the swallow…then it pounces. Mouth puckering finish of sharp fruit juices. €130
      		
 
			
 
Bunnahabhain, along with Bowmore, is Islay’s greatest user of ex-sherry casks; a throwback to the days when it was part of Highland Distillers. Its rich, thick, and ginger-accented spirit matches the attention of European oak extremely well. In this red tea-colored example, you have resin, saddle soap, ginseng, and treacle toffee on the nose, and a fusillade of roasted spices on the palate before the finish reveals sweet gingerbread. A big huggable bear. £60
      		
 
			
 
Just 279 bottles of this 22 year old single cask Glen Scotia have been released by Wemyss Malts, with maturation taking place in a bourbon cask. Fleetingly, very sweet, crunchy apples on the nose, then caramel, milk chocolate, sherbet dips, plus a hint of brine. The palate is sweet and peppery, with spicy toffee, grapefruit, melon, and walnuts. The finish is medium in length, spicy, with table salt in the tail. £90
      		
 
			
 
Highly fragrant and citric, mixing dried and sweet orange peels, moist sultana fruitcake. Lightly malty with gentle nuances of fruit syrup. Pretty and elegant in the mouth, where there’s orange barley water, mint, and crystallized ginger on top of a thick, honeyed delivery before the classic ‘Rothes sweet spices come through. Only a drop or two of water is needed. Recommended. £117
      		
 
			
 
The Wemyss range — overseen by Susan Colville — has been quietly building a deserved reputation for being among the most consistently enjoyable single cask bottlings. This new example hails from the mighty Benrinnes distillery, but shows a milder side to its make — there is indeed ginger aplenty, along with cumin, crystallized fruit, and jellied peach, but behind is a deep earthy and slightly leathery note typical of ‘The Ben.’ It’s these bass notes that dominate on the richly chewy palate. Best neat. £51 
      		
 
			
 
Two Continents refers to the fact that this is matured in India and then Europe. But Amrut has tweaked the winning formula of the first edition, taking the alcoholic strength from 46% to 50% and using bourbon instead of grain casks for European maturation. The changes are immediately noticeable. The nose is honeyed, with key lime pie, and strawberries and cream. The taste is spikier, spicier, and feistier than before, with dark cherry, blood orange, and unripe banana.
-> On page 98 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Well-rounded, solid malt backbone, and very drinkable. These are the main characteristics of this impressive blend. Honeysuckle, vanilla-coated malt and fruit (pineapple upside down cake, lemon tart, plum, bramble) are the primary flavors. Ripe barley, marzipan, beeswax, and clove round out the palate. Gentle, soothing finish. Suntory can make a 12 year old blend this good with just two malt distilleries? Scotland, are you taking notice?
      		
 
			
 
You’d hardy expect Kilchoman to be able to spare casks for independent bottlings, but somehow TWE’s Sukhinder Singh has persuaded Anthony Wills to part with one of his precious babies. It exhibits classic Kilchoman notes of clove and fresh scallop, backed with subtle peat, chamomile, and lint. With water, a typically young, peaty aroma of rubber develops (so drink it neat). It shows the huge potential of this distillery. £50 (500 ml)
      		
 
			
 
Arguably the most successful of the Famous Grouse extensions (well, the competition includes Snow Grouse, for Pete's sake!), the Black Grouse brought ever-popular peat into the mix, a move that was followed by a peatier version of Johnnie Walker Black Label. The label says this is richer and peatier, and it is. But this scores most for a chicory/coffee and liquid licorice undercarpet that makes it very palatable indeed. Neat over ice. (Travel Retail exclusive)€33
      		
 
			
 
Caramel and vanilla notes, with a peppering of spice (primarily cinnamon, but also evergreen, cocoa, teaberry, and nutmeg) and subtle roasted walnut, finishing dry, gritty, and spicy (from the grains and also the oak). Spicier and not as sweet when compared to its sibling Jim Beam Black, an eight year old. There’s certainly a lot going on here. A very “busy” and intriguing whiskey for exploring and discussing. (Exclusive to Travel Retail.)€30
      		
 
			
 
“Extra-aged” bourbon finished in 
sherry casks. The third Distiller’s Masterpiece release, the previous two being over a decade ago. The PX sherry is certainly evident, with its lush, dark fruit (raisin, prune, ripe plum), marmalade, and
layered dark sugars (toffee, molasses, maple syrup). A peppering of spices (cinnamon, allspice, vanilla) and dry, resinous oak round out the palate. Certainly a mood whiskey. Perhaps with a cigar after dinner? 
      		
 
			
 
Nicely balanced, with interwoven soft vanilla, cinnamon, and citrus, all on a bed of light toffee and caramel. More subtle notes of marzipan, tropical fruit, and soft oak add complexity. Traditional in style, with a friendly demeanour. A good bourbon to have on hand, as it is very versatile. I would have preferred this bottled at 45-50%, but this will do just fine as it is. A new regular bottling.
      		
 
			
 
Brittany in Northern France has a Celtic heart, with its own language and culture. Part of that culture is whisky making. It’s a rugged, untamed, and robust part of the country, so you’d expect similar in the whisky. This is anything but. It is has a sweet, fairy dust, fruit sherbet nose; a sweet pear, cinnamon apple Danish palate; and only late on does a sharp hit of pepper appear. This only enhances the experience. €55 (Currently not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Of all the releases I've tasted from this distillery, this version is the one that most resembles Glann ar Mor, stepping a big step away from the peat and toward the sort of earthy fruitiness that is typified by Glann ar Mor. There are more exotic fruits here too—kiwi and mango, perhaps—and something reminiscent of green salad. Surprisingly refreshing. €60 
      		
 
			
 
If you've tasted any Connemara Irish peated whiskey you'll know and love this. This whisky is the most improved in the Bakery Hill range, so that now with water the peat weaves patterns round the standard green apple, honey, and vanilla heart of the malt. Australian peat is very different to that of Scotland, and here it is wispy, smoky, and sweet. A$115
      		
 
			
 
As with its sherry wood-matured sibling, this 10 year old release comprises 9,000 bottles and was distilled using the same lightly peated malt and bottled without chill filtration. Lemongrass, a pinch of salt, wood smoke, and ginger snaps on the nose. Tropical fruits on the soft, slightly oily palate, with a slight underpinning of spicy smoke. Nutty, drying, with mellow spice in the finish.
-> On page 99 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The original Singleton, seemingly discarded as a single malt, rides back defiantly with this bottling. The start shows cherrystone, but there’s an immediate deepening into mature notes of roasted chestnut, varnish, and sweet leather, but always sufficient caramel sweetness to balance. The palate starts sweetly and any grip is dissolved with a drop of water, which also extends what otherwise is a quick fade. Old yes, oak yes, but layered and good.  
      		
 
			
 
Meaning ‘the island of the small boar’, Inish Turk Beg is an island off the coast of Ireland. Its latest launch is a super premium whiskey, and it’s lovely. It’s 10 year old Cooley malt matured in casks that previously contained Irish poteen, matured on the island and brought down to bottling strength with island rainwater. The result is a rich green and yellow fruit melee punctuated with zippy spices and zingy wood notes. Expensive, but very lovable. 
      		
 
			
 
This first limited-edition Taylor release attempts to recreate the “sour mash” process used a century ago. Sweet on the nose and palate (fruit gumdrops, sweet corn, vanilla wafer). Spicy too (cinnamon, evergreen), and clinging on the palate. The sweetness is rescued late, with a firm, dry oak finish. Reminds me of an exhilarating rollercoaster ride that puts the brakes on at the end. Not the most balanced, but certainly distinctive. 
      		
 
			
 
The second release in the new Taylor line by Buffalo Trace, and the first single barrel offering. Similar in personality to the first release (a small batch offering), but a shade darker in color, flavor, and personality. A bit more intense, too, with more mouthfeel, and not as demure. A fair trade-off. Starts off sweet (rummy, burnt dark fruit, fig cake) then becomes dry, with dried spice, tobacco, toasted oak, and leather. Very exciting and distinctive. 
      		
 
			
 
In 2013, the cavernous warehouses of the Canadian Mist distillery in Collingwood, Ontario gave up a single fifty-barrel batch of 100% malted rye. It had been resting there since 1991. Sweet, with the familiar flavors of rye bread, a juicy, joyful thrum burbles to a silken smooth surface before diving deep again only to rebound with warming spices, white pepper, and a pithy citrus pull. Indulgently creamy, Collingwood 21 defines “smooth.” Rich, flavorful, and oh, so mellow.
      		
 
			
 
This bottling of triple-distilled Hazelburn comprises spirit produced in 2003 and matured in unusually small casks known as rundlets and kilderkins. Malt, chocolate, and honey figure on the nose, along with a contrasting marine note in the background. Unctuous and rich on the palate, with soft fruit, almonds, brittle toffee, and lots of spice. The finish is lengthy and earthy, with caramel and vanilla notes ultimately being superseded by oak and sea salt. £60
      		
 
			
 
A robust Speysider — and very tactile too (clinging to the palate), but with no excessive oak. Vanilla and some dark chocolate notes along with coating (yet ironically dry-ish) honey notes. But its biggest flavor note is citrus — particularly lemon, along with some tangerine and a hint of pineapple — which helps to cut through the thickness. Good depth, with dried spice, polished oak, and a wisp of smoke on the finish. (Bottled in 2004, but only recently released to the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
These days the mighty Mortlach is a known quantity, but Diageo’s two other meaty sites—Benrinnes and Dailuaine—remain in the shadows. This is big, boisterous, and sherried, but there’s less of the gravy-browning elements you get from the other two; at Dailuaine it is fruit that is promoted alongside Seville orange, treacle, and the inevitable raisin and date. There are nods to PX sherry as well. Every bit as good as Mortlach.  £43
      		
 
			
 
Very much in the Elijah Craig style: thick and chewy, with layers of toffee, molasses, and vanilla cream. Notes of caramel-nut fudge, cinnamon bun, and blackberry brandy keep it fun. There’s just the right amount of dried oak spice on the finish to round things out. Very good, solid, affordable bourbon. 
      		
 
			
 
The third recently released 100% rye whiskey sourced from Canada, with the others being WhistlePig (50%, $70) and Jefferson’s (47%, $40). (The one you purchase might depend on which one you can find, as they are all quite limited.) This one sells at a premium to the other two, but shows polish and is nicely rounded. Layers of sweetness (honeyed fruit, caramel, nutty toffee, maple syrup), toasted oak, cinnamon, evergreen, nutmeg, and a dusting of cocoa. Very distinctive!
-> On page 100 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Rugby union fans will recognize the name and spot that 1987 was the last time the New Zealand All Blacks won the world cup. Bottled for this year's tournament, it's 24 year old whisky from the demolished Wilson distillery in Dunedin, and it's a rarity — very good New Zealand malt. It's not unlike the Shackleton — big lemon and smoke notes, a pear and apricot heart, lots of oaky spice, and a delicious aniseed rancio conclusion. $NZ 299
      		
 
			
 
Whisky Advocate is moving out into the unknown, turning over the rocks and discovering beautiful and unfamiliar creatures like this one. In tiny distilleries in Switzerland, Sweden, and, er, Swansea, they're throwing the rule book up in the air and creating new whiskies based on how it falls. This has spent four years in a beer barrel and then a year in a port cask, and it's fabulous. Think licorice, aniseed, and cherry-flavored soda. Then add cream, fruit…and yowza! €35
      		
 
			
 
Master blender Sandy Hyslop has deliberately attempted to capture Christmas in the glass, and so it should come as no surprise to find a rich, full, and flavorsome whisky with sherry trifle, red berries, orange fruit, and mince pie filling in the mix. It's put together with grace and style, mixes well, and is that rare beast — a blend that can be enjoyed on its own.  
      		
 
			
 
This is 8 year old 100% rye Canadian whisky that Fremont Mischief distillery imports and bottles. Congratulations are due: the rye spice-vanilla aromas are strongly similar to their younger, own-make whiskey reviewed below. The extra age shows: this is Canadian-mellow, not a fiery American rye, even at 45%. All the spice is there, and the floral/grassy complexity, but there are more rich oak notes, and a high, arching finish that sustains the whiskey on the palate.
      		
 
			
 
A nose of hot cereal with a dusting of dry cocoa and oaky vanilla, and hints of figs and sesame oil. The palate yields clean grains — a real crack of rye among them — and oak, dried apricot, unsweetened licorice, and a long finish of warming rich cereal. Strikingly clean and non-cloying for Canadian, sweet but not overdone. Good for mixing, but equally good for sipping; a nice end-of-day dram. (Sold as both Very Old and 18 Year Old.)
      		
 
			
 
Suntory’s second distillery was once the largest producer of malt whisky in the world. Located high in the Japanese Alps, its buildings are hidden within a thickly forested national park, and there is something of that environment in this expression, which is filled with the scents of fern, wet bamboo, pine, and mint. Japanese single malt at its most beguiling.£40
      		
 
			
 
A single cask, cask strength 16 year old malt from the demolished Willowbank distillery to celebrate the New Zealand All Blacks World Cup victory, and further evidence that New Zealand is back on track. This is whisky hitting its stride. Creamy and honeyed with a cracked lemon pepper undercoat, it's fresh, and very drinkable, with a delightful sugar and spice combo running through it. Oak only really makes an appearance in the finale. NZ$229
      		
 
			
 
Very typical of old grain whiskies: light in body and floral, with soothing vanilla and a mélange of tropical fruit (mandarin in syrup, honey-kissed pineapple, banana, and coconut cream). The better examples, like this one, are not dominated by dry oak on the finish. Subtle spices (ginger, cocoa powder) add intrigue. Old grain whiskies are hard to find but worth exploring. (A Park Avenue Liquor exclusive.)
      		
 
			
 
Three batches of malt, smoked separately with peat, cherry wood, and beech. The nose is Islay-reminiscent peat, with some beech bacon under it, but the top is all cherry; very rewarding. For all the nose, the mouth is relatively mild; mostly juicy malt up front, then opening to the peat fire in the middle, the beech crowding around the sides, and the cherry floating overtop like a good pipe tobacco. Smooth, smoky finish. Compelling.
      		
 
			
 
Master distiller Jean-Marc Daucourt uses French wheat and malted barley in his distillations and ages his spirit in different woods, noticeably Limousin oak. The nose brings marmalade, newly unfurled bracken, sanded wood on a workshop bench, light pepper, dried apricot, and pineapple. It’s a well-balanced dram showing marmalade sweetness, fruit pastilles, lime zest, and ginger, which adds to the toasted, spicy tingle. The creamy mouthfeel concludes with the spices in retreat, leaving an orange hum. Some kind of wonderful.
-> On page 101 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The question with this sort of blended malt is whether the whole outperforms the sum of its parts. This is a big, rich, oily, and peaty whisky, suggesting both the Ledaig—the peated version of Tobermory and often a bland malt—and the Bowmore—capable of big smoke notes when it wants to—are firing on all cylinders. There's not much subtlety to it, but it's enjoyable all the same.€40
      		
 
			
 
Bitter, oily, medicinally minty rye in the nose, and a pleasant undercurrent of oaky vanilla. Brisk, hot rye mixes furiously with wood notes, pear and berry esters, and a light grainy sweetness; a madly busy whiskey that’s quite fun on the palate. The finish is minty and grassy, wrapped in oak, but somewhat quick. Interesting, and delicious.
      		
 
			
 
The fruitiest of the three. Notes of ripe fruit, candied almonds, treacle and toffee. Dry, spicy oak notes on the finish. Rich and thick in texture, but not to the point of being cloying. And while the sherry notes are prominent throughout, they do not dominate like many other Scotch and Irish whiskeys. It’s well balanced and very enjoyable. Save this one for after dinner.
      		
 
			
 
An interesting alternative to a traditional Irish whiskey (kind of reminds me of the rum-casked Springbanks and the Glenfiddich Havana Reserve). Flavors of toffee, light molasses and caramelized sugar throughout, with a hint of lime and spice. Chewy in texture, too. There’s a nice interplay between the sweet rum notes and the dry oak spices, with the oak emerging the victor on the finish.
      		
 
			
 
I was surprised to find that Grant’s blends were noticeable by their absence in the U.S. But with the purchase of Tuthilltown in New York and Tullamore Dew in Ireland, that is slowly changing; and here's proof. Beautiful, honeyed, rich, but the 40% ABV makes it the whisky equivalent of a radio DJ cutting off “Freebird” before the solo at the end. Still great, and indeed better than most competition, but not the classic it could be.
      		
 
			
 
Taken slow and easy, this 100% corn whisky tells a story, one you have to suss out gradually. It’s big and flavorful with hints of sweet corn, cow barn, and spices, followed by peppermint, lime peel, lilacs, and oak. Then it turns fresh, creamy, and alive with invigorating pepper and just a smidgen of sweetness, blending lemon drops, vanilla, and barley sugar until the story resolves satisfyingly on your palate. (Canada only) C$40
      		
 
			
 
This soft, fruity luxury is a stablemate to Corby’s Lot No. 40, and another resurrected member of the once-lost Canadian Whisky Guild. Hiram Walker’s distillery, where Pike Creek is made, is one of the largest in North America. However, the owner, Pernod-Ricard, encourages creativity and innovation as well as product reliability. Gingery dark fruits mingle with canned fruit and clean oak, while a peppery nuttiness lingers below soft red wine and white grapefruit. C$40
      		
 
			
 
This is more reassuringly tawny than the standard strength, and the alcohol strength oozes out of the glass. The nose is cleaner and fresher than the standard, with maraschino cherry, freeze-dried raspberries, white chocolate, and tamarind pulp. Neat sips showcase rich dark fruits of blackcurrant, black cherry, and dense chew bars. A dash of water amplifies the sweet fruits with heavenly, dusty aromatics and red, fleshy fruits. Yours for a pretty penny. £189
      		
 
			
 
A smashing, rich sherry nose showcases rosehip, elderberry, scorched oak, pipe tobacco, roasted coriander seeds, and damp dunnage warehouses. The core of the flavor is the lush orange jelly hidden in McVitie’s Jaffa cakes, combined with clove, malt, treacle, dried mango, and ginger. Water draws out stronger performances from the malty notes, together with some red berry characteristics. Let it roll around the mouth, it’s terrific stuff (Batch 1, 148 bottles). £57
      		
 
			
 
Paul John is taking its entry into the world of single malt very seriously, and very slowly but surely. After two single cask offerings to find its range, Brilliance and Edited are its first general releases. Brilliance is unpeated and is a delight: rich, full, young but not immature, and with lime and citrus Starburst chews, sweet candy, and some icing sugar, it trips across the palate. Conclusive proof that Amrut isn’t the only Indian game in town.
-> On page 102 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Pronounced “Te Veg,” this has its roots in the Isle of Skye, and as there’s only one distillery there it’s highly likely that the odd
drop of Talisker has found its way into the mix. Whether it has or not, this is stirring stuff, non-chill filtered so that the flavors burst forth. As you might expect, it’s rugged with brine and chili, giving it a distinctive spice edge. But the delivery is a caramel fudge delight, with luxury chocolate praline in there too.
      		
 
			
 
Rich aroma of vanilla and corn, crimped and spiced with oak. Authoritative strength, full and solid; sharp oak and dry mint, with vanilla and cornbread arriving toward the finish, which is the only jarring note. There's too much woody bite at the close. Still, very much a sipping whiskey; don't put anything but a bit of water or a single cube of ice in this. By far, the best of the Total Wine store brands I've received. Sourced whiskey. 
      		
 
			
 
3 year old peated malt whisky, aged in Oregon oak. Rich nose of peat—burning leaves, a touch of sweet diesel—and fresh oak. There's no stinting on the peat; it's young, it's in your face. Whiskey to stand toe-to-toe with Portland's hopped-to-blazes beers. Not just peat: creamy malt makes a solid floor and an exit that may be the most complex part of the experience. Refined for a 3 year old. Limited annual release.
      		
 
			
 
This marks the biggest identity change since Clark Kent morphed into Superman; the plodding Paddy brand has been reshaped for this limited edition into a young and feisty pot still whiskey. It's meant to recreate the taste of 100 years past, which begs the question: what happened? This has raspberry, violet, and pear, but there's a mysterious stranger at the heart, a pepper and oily center: a bit like a gypsy in a wedding dress. But it scrubs up well. €75
      		
 
			
 
Finger Lakes Distilling rye whiskey infused with Catskill Mountains honey. The nose is grassy, oily rye whiskey, and the honey’s there mostly as a rounder, richer character enhancer. It’s much more present in the mouth, merging very nicely indeed with the rye. There’s authentic, delicious honey flavor here, and it’s balanced beautifully as the rye keeps it from being sticky or oversweet. An excellent and interesting flavored whiskey; up there with the best examples of the category.
      		
 
			
 
This example of Rosebank was distilled in March 1992, a year before the distillery’s closure, and bottled in December 2013. The cask yielded 141 bottles. The nose is light and mildly floral, with ripe pears, honey, and vanilla. Firm and fruity on the surprisingly full palate, with a sprinkling of white pepper, plus summer berries and caramel. Tropical fruit, soft spices, and benign oak in the finish, with a final flourish of licorice. £400
      		
 
			
 
Pale gold. Lightly floral and perfumed. The impression of honey on warm buttered scones. As it opens, so this gentle complexity grows, and gives a sense of some substance. Water reveals a hint of malt, fruit syrups, and pear blossom. The palate is creamy and needs a drop of water to reveal the acid/sweet flavor of white currant, and a hint of marzipan. A classic example of a light whisky—and a distillery—which could easily be overlooked. Don’t. £74
      		
 
			
 
William Grant is making pioneering efforts to develop Girvan as a single grain whisky brand, with more to come. The aromas beckon with masses of buttery vanilla notes, fresh apple, cinnamon stick bundles, dark peel, and chocolate pralines. The creamy, unctuous texture packs in white chocolate, citrus, lime, chewy caramels, and pineapple, with soft American oak characteristics. Long finish of vanilla, ground cinnamon, and mint. One of the tastiest grains on the market: expensive, but still, it’s patently very good. £250
      		
 
			
 
A rye-fueled, horse-drawn sleigh ride to a backwoods Quebec sugar shack springs instantly to mind. Vanilla, toasted wood, brittle maple snow taffy, and the woody, crystalline granularity of maple sugar in a velvety smooth whisky base. Hot pepper, wood smoke, and green maple bark fold into a steaming cauldron of whisky barrel notes. The first few days’ maple syrup is the richest and that alone is what blender Michel Marcil uses for this ultra-premium maple whisky. (
 C$50
      		
 
			
 
Gold in color and sweet on the nose, with a little nudge of mash, stewed apples, and cobnuts. As it develops, the impression is of a polite garden tea at the minister’s: vanilla sponge, scones with cream and strawberry jam, with a background of lightly-turned earth. The palate continues equally sweetly and is lightly hot when neat. A glimpse of summer pleasures in wintertime.
-> On page 103 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This bourbon is a blend of whiskeys aged a minimum of 5 years, with part of that time spent in California's Central Coastal hills. Breaker leads with a strong oak nose supported by cinnamon and caramel. On the palate, the maritime impact is there: it’s softer and less oaky, with a good balance of cinnamon, caramel, and a touch of clove. Breaker is a very restrained and understated bourbon, but that’s also what makes it so damn likable. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Gilbert Holl brewed beer in Ribeauvillé, but then began to distill his local malted barley to produce the first whisky from Alsace. This 8 year old has an attractively perfumed nose of Parma violets, dunnage warehouse, and wood smoke, with top notes of apricot and peach. Plunge into a thick, fruity mouthfeel of melting orange sorbet flecked with lime zest, and a moreish, mouth-coating finish of tropical fruits. Punching above its weight, this is highly recommended (
) €49
      		
 
			
 
Ginger may not be the first flavor that leaps to mind when you think flavored whiskey, but then you realize how common the combination is: Jack and Ginger, Jameson and Ginger, and now Virgil Kaine. Fresh ginger is unmistakable on the nose and the secret to this whiskey’s success. On the palate, fresh ginger seamlessly integrates with oak, black pepper, and clove spice. Underneath is sweet vanilla that helps keep everything in balance. A well-executed and savvy flavored whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
A wild aromatic opening — anise, sweet cicely, even a hint of wormwood — with more oak than the 21 year old, but not in a dominating fashion, rather just a framing device. Still fresh and acidic, with touches of a bridal bouquet, freshly baked warm sponge cake, walnut flesh, and, with water, a little bread-and-butter pudding. The acidity gives it a zippy, clean palate zestiness with cumin and angelica. Beautifully balanced. £400
      		
 
			
 
Treacle tarts, black bun, and polished antique furniture, with fainter accents of dark chocolate, espresso, and delicate smoke flowing freely from the glass. Densely structured palate. Initially, chocolate-coated coffee beans, then it blossoms into dried fig, date, with a developing deep, tangy chocolate orange note, fading to dusty cocoa like the memory of a warm embrace. Not to be confused with Cutty Sark, this Storm is bottled by the Whisky Shack Company.
      		
 
			
 
The North of Scotland distillery (formerly Strathmore distillery) was a neighbor of Cambus and operated from 1957-1980 in Clackmannanshire. Bottlings are few and far between. This one is quite forward. Apple peelings, baked apricot, cinnamon, nutmeg, sherry notes with oak wood, beef stock, and adhesives. It tastes sweet, vibrant, and juicy with red berry fruits, rosewater, strawberry cream soda, cherryade, and cough linctus. A slightly bitter finish punctures the juiciness. (
 
£165
      		
 
			
 
Good nose: fresh-ground corn, warm oak, and light cinnamon. Impressively friendly even at full proof: corn pudding, sun-warmed oak plank, rich and nuanced cinnamon spice, a powerful engine running strong. A splash of water brings out some sweet berries, revs up the oak and pulls out more spice, and opens up the finish into a full-throated roar of oak, corn, and sweet citrus. This is what happens when you let a good barrel run at full throttle. Sourced whiskey. 
      		
 
			
 
Powerfully smoky, this one. Driftwood bonfires with a distinctive salinity to the smoke. Neglected fruit bowls. The tannins and red wine influences of cherry, apple, peach, and mango attempt to match the intensity of the burning engine of peat. Sooty embers diminish, leaving cherry-studded fudge to finish. Wonderful design touches inspired by the Book of Kells on this peated single malt from Cooley finished in red wine casks from Ànima Negra. (349 bottles) €250
      		
 
			
 
Rather elegant blend, with aromas of woodworker’s bench, salted cashew, and dried banana chips, all backed by gentle bonfire smoke. Creamy caramel toffee, Victoria sponge, red currant, raspberry, and more oak build into a thick, luscious mouthful. Any smoke drifts away in the initial seconds. Toffee and fruit linger, making a very lengthy finish. A masterful top of the range blend from La Martinquaise. Well worth seeking out. €55
      		
 
			
 
A creamy delight: rice pudding laden with swollen raisins, brown sugar melting on hot porridge (if this were scotch, it would be salt). It begins sweet, with a juicy fruitiness before a rodeo of spiciness bucks on the tip of the tongue. The texture is creamy and light but substantial enough to carry these big flavors. Dried lemon and double cream stretch out into a lengthy finish. A unique profile, but a fitting tribute. (1,499 bottles) £50
-> On page 104 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This jaunty, rye-forward whisky from a mash of 64% corn, 31.5% rye, and 4.5% barley malt was distilled in an arcane Coffey still and spent seven years in new oak barrels. Flavors vary remarkably among barrels making each of these single barrel bottlings unique. This one exudes sweet floral perfume, vanilla, oaky tannins, sweet and sour sauce, spices, and basket loads of tropical fruits, all centered on soft banana candy. A long spicy, velvet tannin finish. 
      		
 
			
 
Burnt sugar, wet raisins, oakspice, and a deep, underlying grain character. Flavors are wonderfully integrated: corn, malt, mellow syrup, hints of ripe plum and grape, wrapped in a light confection. Finish is light, warm, and lingering. Forty Creek releases a limited edition whisky every fall; this one focuses on grains rather than wood, according to distiller John Hall. Canadian distribution only.
      		
 
			
 
Style: Single malt scotch (distillery not identified) Color: Amber mahogany Aroma: Ripe and lush; notes of fallen fruit, toffee, damp earth, and spicy oak, with a hint of mint and anise. Palate: Similar to its aroma. Rich, full, thick, and somewhat viscous. A beautiful marriage of lush, ripe fruit and spicy, resinous oak notes. Evolves on the palate, with a very long finish. 

      		
 
			
 
There appears to be a concerted effort to bring this distillery out of the shadows: A Good Thing in my opinion. This limited
release is very Cardhu, with masses of mandarin, dried peach, and honey, reminiscent of a fine oxidized Chinese Phoenix Oolong tea, while still retaining the effervescent buzz of youth. Akin to a fine Cuban rum on the tongue, with bittersweet chocolate, dark cherry, and tangy, spicy life, it dies a little quickly, but is a lovely dram. £160
      		
 
			
 
Gold color. Delicate aromas of tropical fruits (coconut, pineapple, mango), marshmallow and vanilla. Light in body, with delicate exotic flavors that deliver what the aroma promises. Soft, gentle, delicately creamy finish. 

      		
 
			
 
This is a special bottling for London department store Selfridge's, but it represents a clever strategy by artisan Compass Box to set its own agenda by regionalizing its whiskies. This is a long way from the New York blend—indeed, creamier and sweeter than other recent releases. It has a honey heart, traces of cinnamon, and menthol in the mix, plus wispy smoke. There's some spice and peat late on, but in relatively subdued form. Very pleasant. £85
      		
 
			
 
Great King Street was our Blend of the Year two years ago and Compass Box wondered where to take it next. So they have released two versions, asking customers to decide between them by voting online. The other one is peated and will probably win easily, which is a shame, because this is a more subtle and better whisky. Sherry, syrup, honey, apple, and sultanas are all here, but nuanced. Delightful. £30
      		
 
			
 
Bottled as London's Big Ben began to strike midnight on the day that the word 'vatted' was outlawed in Scotch whisky terminology, this is a mix of grains from different distilleries and does the campaign for more Scotch grain whisky no harm at all.  Gossamer soft and smooth with a honeycomb heart and milk chocolate, vanilla, and the odd prod of spice, it's a cushion of a whisky. Luxurious, indulgent, and well made. £125 
      		
 
			
 
Just eight whiskies in the blend, married and finished in first fill Spanish sherry and bourbon casks. An insistent nose, crackling with spices, with toasted Eccles cake anointed with grated nutmeg, vanilla extract, cassia, and dark soy sauce. Light honey and vanilla, tangerine oils, and lime peel exhibit perfectly-paced development, with flavor building over a minute or more. Warming ginger, spices, and tropical fruits of guava and papaya close out this first annual special edition. Impressive work.
      		
 
			
 
An example that older, more expensive isn’t always better, this 18 year old gem is as good as many blends twice its price. The foundation of Johnnie Walker Gold is delicate, clean, and honeyed, along with a fresh sea character (from Clynelish?) that provides a youthful zing. Notes of vanilla, shortbread, tropical fruit, freshly cut hay, marshmallow, and even a hit of peat, round out the palate. Its finish is subtly complex and nicely balanced. The blend has improved nicely over the past several years. 

-> On page 105 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Chivas's new entry into the premium blend category. A complex whisky (on the nose and palate) in the same vein as Chivas 18, only deeper, with more caramelized sweetness, darker fruit, and greater emphasis on dried spices and roasted nuts (and perhaps even tobacco). Everything moves along nicely -- and entertainingly -- until the whisky approaches the finish on the palate. Its age begins to show, as spicy oak dryness and suggestions of polished leather begin to dominate through to the finish. An enjoyable whisky, but I prefer the 18 year old to the 25 year old for its impeccable balance.
      		
 
			
 
An accidental “mingling” of rye whiskey with bourbon, resulting in a product that acts like bourbon with an unusually high percentage of rye in the mashbill. It shows, with vibrant notes of warming cinnamon, fresh mint, nutmeg, licorice root, and a hint of tellicherry pepper. All this is soothed by vanilla, caramel, and subtle honeyed citrus. Lively, distinctive, and versatile.
      		
 
			
 
There’s no age statement, but this wheated bourbon is about 10 years old. This is the softest and gentlest of the Antique Collection. Notes of molasses, black raspberry jam, ripe blueberry, teaberry, soft fig, and cinnamon. Gently spicy, clean finish. Could this whiskey be too easy to drink?

      		
 
			
 
A set of two 100% rye whiskeys, triple distilled in copper pot stills, with the difference between them being the type of barrels in which they were aged. One was matured in a new charred cask, while the other one was aged in a used cask. They are packaged in half-bottle sizes (375 ml) and sold as a set for $100.
Very pale in color, showing the limited oak influence. The used cask allows the rye to shine. An uncluttered whiskey, with fresh mint, soft cinnamon, creamy vanilla, hay, cut grass, and honeyed orchard fruit (green apple, pear, peach). Grassy finish. The more elegant of the two.
      		
 
			
 
This is a rare single barrel, non-chill filtered release. Straight wheat whiskeys can be almost too easy-going.  Not chill-filtering adds teasing, subtle complexity. Gently sweet, with maple syrup, caramel, marzipan, and coconut cream, along with a dusting of vanilla, cinnamon, and green tea. A whiskey for a lazy Saturday afternoon...or perhaps with pancakes at brunch? (A Julio’s Liquors exclusive.) 
      		
 
			
 
The oak staves are placed in a “hot box” at 133 degrees and then steamed before being built up into a barrel. Aged over 16 years, this is pleasant whiskey (if not overly complex), with caramel, tropical fruit, marzipan, a hint of toasted coconut, and a nice creamy texture. My favorite of the two experimental releases. Price is per 375ml.
      		
 
			
 
A lively bourbon, with bright fruit, honeyed vanilla, and fragrant floral notes. Lean on the palate, with a firm, dry, spicy finish. A youthful whiskey that skips along until the finish. It doesn’t have the thicker, sweeter mid-palate like Barrel#87-6L reviewed here. As a result, its finish is firm, and crisply dry. (Bottled exclusively for The Party Source.) 

      		
 
			
 
Very creamy and gently sweet with a slightly oily texture. Notes of vanilla, toasted coconut, caramel, tropical fruit, honey-glazed almond, cocoa, and dusty corn. Well-balanced and soothing. A very easy-drinking whiskey. (Reviewer’s note: these are single barrel bottlings, and they will vary from one barrel to the next.)

      		
 
			
 
A combination of 10 and 19 year old bourbons from two different recipes. Very spicy, but no excessive oak (given the 19 year old component). Still, there’s definitely more oak than last year’s release, and maybe more than I would like for balance. Along with the cinnamon, cool mint, cocoa powder, and nutmeg, there are caramelized sugars and bright citrus notes. This is a tight whiskey -- not heavy and lethargic, like some 10-plus year old bourbons can be. The flavors are crisp and vibrant, all the way to its polished oak, tobacco-tinged finish.
      		
 
			
 
I was concerned this whiskey would be woody and dry, but it isn’t. (By comparison, the 2009 “Mariage Collection” release, a combination of 10 and 19 year old whiskeys, comes across much more tannic and dry—especially on the finish.) The grain influence is less prominent (as might be expected), but it is replaced by some nicely dovetailed oak sugars and spices, and forward fruit. It’s gentle on the nose and palate, with creamy vanilla, caramel custard, apricot, nectarine, glazed citrus, cherry pie, and graham cracker, spiked with subtle mint, clove, and cinnamon. Smooth, soothing finish…therapeutic even. If you like your bourbons bold, stimulating, and challenging, then this one isn’t for you. But if you want bourbon to comfort you like a warm blanket in cold weather, then give this a try.
-> On page 106 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
A follow up to the original Jefferson’s Ocean, 62 barrels of mature bourbon spent 5 months at sea. Can I detect any noticeable sea influence? Not really—perhaps a hint of brine—but it’s nice, pleasant bourbon nonetheless with nothing out of place. Well rounded notes of layered sweetness (caramel, vanilla, maple syrup and a hit of sweet corn), honeyed orchard fruit, and spiced with cinnamon and evergreen. Soft, soothing finish. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
After regular bourbon maturation, this is finished in a barrel made from toasted wood with no charring (and no age statement). The wood character of the nose is restrained; corn, vanilla, some nuts and light citrus, but just a light hint of oak spice. Complex mouth: corn pudding, cornmeal, sugar cookies, caramel, pawpaw, jackfruit, and a real creaminess that stretches into the finish…where we get the delayed oak. Mature whiskey smooth, young whiskey lively, and a good price, too. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
The third straight year of Birthday Bourbon releases. Last year we were blessed with not one, but two practically flawless whiskeys (one quite richly flavored, the other light and delicate). This 1995 vintage is nearly as good and reminds me in some ways of the first Birthday Bourbon release two years ago. Sweet notes of caramel, maple, cocoa powder, and vanilla fudge (particularly on the front of the palate) are mingled with candied fruit and dry mint. The whiskey finishes fairly dry (more than its bouquet would suggest) with notes of polished leather, mint, dark chocolate, and dried tea. 

      		
 
			
 
A prime component in Dewar’s blended scotch. The finer bottles of Aberfeldy are quite flavorful, yet still maintain a degree of elegance and finesse. This bottling is an excellent example of this. Its dominant flavor note is fruit (orange, honeydew melon), with some creamy vanilla notes, caramel, and light toffee. Subtle spice notes and a hint of peat tease the palate. The extra aging adds depth to the whisky, yet this whisky remains quite clean and fresh on the palate. Subtly spicy, gently dry finish. Nicely done! (Exclusive to Binny’s Beverage Depot, Chicago, IL.) 

      		
 
			
 
Independent releases of the Perthshire single malt Aberfeldy are relatively rare, and the first batch of That Boutique-y Whisky Company’s no age statement Aberfeldy runs to 155 numbered bottles. The nose features coconut ice, vanilla, malt, candied peel, and ginger. Good mouthfeel, with more malt, ginger-nut biscuits, icing sugar, and milk chocolate. The finish is drying, with oak and black pepper. £65/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
A single cask of Ardmore aged in a first-fill bourbon cask and then finished in quarter casks. This one is more mature, with more depth than the standard Ardmore Traditional Cask (which I rated 80 a few years back). Notes of toffee, vanilla bean, chocolate fudge, licorice stick, bourbon, tar, charcoal, and a hint of burnt raisin. Very nice! (A Julio’s Liquors Exclusive.) 
      		
 
			
 
Complex, dynamic, and well-balanced. Honeyed vanilla, bright fruit (lemon, tangerine, nectarine), sultana, green grapes, and banana bread, peppered with ginger and subtle, gripping grape skin. Great mouth-feel (from the oak), which adds another dimension. That’s what 46% and no chill-filtering will do for a whisky. One of the better Arran whiskies I’ve tasted. (Released in 2009. Sadly not available in the U.S.)£38
      		
 
			
 
The latest limited release in the Icons of Arran series was distilled in 1999 and matured in fourteen ex-bourbon barrels and seven sherry hogsheads. Initially launched in the UK, but global availability is anticipated. A sprinkling of coconut, vanilla, and spices, with pears, melons, and pineapple on the nose. Full and fruity on the palate, becoming maltier and nuttier. Sweet spices, especially stem ginger, and a hint of honey. Drying slowly in the very spicy finish (6,000 bottles). £42
      		
 
			
 
This U.S.-exclusive Premium Bourbon Single cask #2096 contrasts nicely with its sherry cask-matured sibling, and offers vanilla, cocoa powder, malt extract, ripe bananas, and spicy sultanas on the nose. The palate is smooth and spicy, with ginger snaps and developing butteriness. The finish is medium to long, with chili notes and citrus fruits at the last. 
      		
 
			
 
The ancient variety of barley known as bere that was used to make this Arran single malt was grown on Orkney and distilled in 2004. It was matured for eight years in bourbon barrels, and 5,800 bottles have been released. Very fruity on the nose, principally peaches, with vanilla and fudge, something slightly herbal, wet grass, and finally homemade lemonade. Oily mouthfeel, with fresh oak, cloves, and wild berries. An atypical Arran! The finish is drying and moreish.  £48
-> On page 107 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This 1977 ‘house’ vintage expression has been matured for 32 years in oloroso sherry casks. Just 240 bottles have been produced. Delicate, sweet, and floral on the nose, with old leather, caramel, vanilla, and malt. The caramel deepens with time. The palate is initially sweet, smooth, and malty, with pear drops; becoming nuttier, with soft oak in the medium-length finish. £370 Currently not available in the U.S. 
      		
 
			
 
The latest triple distilled bottling from the Lowland distillery of Auchentoshan has been matured for 35 years in bourbon casks and is presented non-chill filtered and at cask strength. Just 500 bottles are available globally. Apple crumble and custard on the nose, with developing cereal notes. Smooth and enticing. Spice, fresh fruits, honey, and marzipan on the buttery palate, which ultimately becomes drier. The finish is long and discreetly drying, with spices, malted barley, and a citrus tang in the tail.Price is approximate.
      		
 
			
 
This is the second batch of Silveroak 1990 from Auchentoshan, and it has benefited from an extra year of maturation in bourbon and 
 sherry casks. The 22 year old is exclusive to Travel Retail outlets. Notably floral on the nose, with fudge, banana, ginger, and attractive oak. On the palate it delivers vanilla, apricots, apples, more ginger, and oak. The finish is long and spicy, with dark coffee notes and a hint of menthol. Greater complexity than its predecessor.
      		
 
			
 
Balblair has followed up the first release of its 1975 vintage bottling with a second, which differs significantly in character, having been matured in American oak sherry casks, whereas the initial release had been aged in Spanish oak sherry casks. Floral, mellow, and slightly oily on the nose, with a savory background and ready-salted crisps. Silky smooth on the palate, with citrus fruit, a hint of wood smoke, coconut, and honey. The finish is spicy, with aniseed and oak.
      		
 
			
 
Balblair Vintage 2003 replaces the previous 2002 expression, matured in second-fill bourbon barrels, with the contents of eighteen making up this first release. Tinned peaches and apricot jam on the nose, with underlying honey and caramel. Early malt, then zesty lemon notes on the palate, which also features freshly-cut grass and hazelnuts. The medium-length finish yields white pepper and cocoa powder.
      		
 
			
 
Very traditional West Highland style: somewhat rustic, muscular, and oily in texture, with notes of leather, bourbon, espresso, orange peel, kiwi, and a suggestion of ultra-aged Caribbean rum. Occasionally, a softer side of vanilla and coconut shows itself, but, if this whiskey were a man, he would be a lumberjack. 

      		
 
			
 
Very robust and chewy-this whisky has plenty of gusto-with notes of toffee, vanilla cream, bitter chocolate, powdered cocoa, and almond fig cake. Background citrus (especially on the nose), tobacco, and polished leather. Nice depth for such a young whisky, and very exciting. 

      		
 
			
 
This single cask 17 year old expression of Ben Nevis was matured in a sherry butt which yielded 747 bottles. It appears in Carn Mor’s “Strictly Limited” series of releases and has not been chill filtered. The bold nose opens with slightly savory notes and hard-boiled eggs. Sherry, malt, and figs subsequently develop. Quite full-bodied, with rich Jaffa orange and developing plain chocolate on the palate. More dark chocolate and a suggestion of fennel in the medium-length finish. £55
      		
 
			
 
Leafy bonfire smoke, damp kiln, tar, anise, dark chocolate, and a hint of clove. All this is balanced by an underlying malty foundation and a kiss of honey, vanilla, and tropical fruit. Nice to see single cask, cask strength bottlings of peated BenRiach. (Exclusive to The Party Source.) 

      		
 
			
 
It’s very exciting to see a peated Speyside whisky; they are so rare these days. Ideally, the peat smoke will add an additional dimension to the whisky without dominating the whisky’s other flavors. Most Speysiders are big enough to embrace the smoke, as is the case with this expression of BenRiach. The turfy peat smoke is offset nicely by layers of sweetness (oatcakes, butterscotch, vanilla, and honeyed malt) and soft fruit. Dry, smoking ember finish. A steep price for a 10 year old whisky-whisky prices have been climbing faster than real estate lately-but this whisky is worth its price. 

-> On page 108 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The most richly textured and complex of the unpeated expressions. Base notes of honeyed malt and creamy vanilla are complemented by citrus fruit (lemon, tangerine), coconut, bitter chocolate, exotic wood shavings, and a hint of assorted nuts. Polished oak finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Bright gold color, and bright in flavor. Very much in the Bladnoch style, with honey-kissed lemon, tangerine, kiwi, creamy vanilla, lightly toasted marshmallow, marzipan, cut grass, and hay. Richly textured for a Lowland, and palate-coating (a tad oily, too!). The extra years have added some depth, while still retaining a youthful zest. Very enjoyable.

      		
 
			
 
Matured in a port pipe. The third in a trilogy (the other two being bourbon and sherry cask-aged). I like this one better than the sherry cask 1990 vintage, but not quite as much as the bourbon cask bottling which was in our Top Ten whiskies two years ago. Lovely amber ruby color. The port flavors are obvious, but not sappy or dominating. They’re clean, and contribute a layered sweetness and ripe red berry fruit notes to the traditional, moderately peated Bowmore smoke and peat. Lingering smoke and chocolate on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Medium-bodied and nicely textured. Good balance of flavors -- and well-integrated, too -- with lovely sweet notes (cereal grain, cookie dough, caramel, and vanilla cream), young heathery peat, tar, fishnets, and brine that is complementary, but not aggressive, with a suggestion of lavender and tangerine. Balanced finish. (332 bottles produced.)
      		
 
			
 
Last year’s was a top-notch, defiantly sherried example of Bowmore. This year’s batch thrusts equally boldly, but starts in a more Japanese-accented fashion: think soy, miso paste, and salmon teriyaki. Light leather, with hickory campfire smoke coming through strongly. The big, oily, tarry palate is like a spent barbecue with a hint of skidding car tires on Bowmore High Street. So, still a belter, but why so limited? Beam Suntory, please sort it out! (6,000 bottles) £60
      		
 
			
 
Aged in a sherry cask, and the sherry is clean and bright. I’m also picking up a good dose of warming peat smoke, along with molasses, and a gentle maltiness throughout. A peppering of subtle brine and a hint of seaweed peak through occasionally, reminding one of its Islay roots. 

      		
 
			
 
Bright gold color. Fresh, appetizing aroma of vanilla malt, honey, brine, and subtle tropical fruit. Light to medium in body and slightly oily in texture. Delicious, fresh, subtly complex flavors of vanilla malt, sea salt, subtle tropical fruit, and fresh herbs, finishing dry and lightly spicy.

   Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: high $70s. Available nationwide. 

   Since the owners of Murray McDavid also control the Bruichladdich distillery, one would expect a good bottling. This is a good one indeed, and very exciting to drink. It is nicely matured, fresh, and deliciously appetizing-almost mouth-watering.
      		
 
			
 
This is six year old, 40 ppm phenol (very smoky) whisky distilled at Bruichladdich, bottled at cask strength and enhanced in Madeira casks. A young whisky, but mature enough to say that it’s not too young. The immediate impact is damp peat smoke and smoldering charcoal. If you are patient and observant enough (and with an addition of water), you’ll coax notes of vanilla, berried fruit, pear, green apple, and underlying spice (fresh mint, anise), all leading to a briny, smoldering smoke finish. A cult whisky for those who like to push the envelope. When compared to its predecessor, PC5, PC6 is slightly darker in color, creamier, fruitier, and a shade softer. Given this, I still prefer the PC5 over the PC6 for its clarity and innocence.

      		
 
			
 
The fresher of the two, with appetizing brine, honey, lemon rock candy, golden raisin, and peach. Subtle ginger, toasted marshmallow, and coconut round out the palate. Very bright and lively. 

      		
 
			
 
Smoky, yes, but the effect is more shore-like: on the beach, hot sand, wood smoke, and a faint hint of balloons…there must be a party going on. In addition you get olive oil, preserved lemon, and eucalyptus. The palate is thick with strawberry sweeties that push back against the peat. Water calms things (suggesting this would work with soda), while the finish sees the campfire emit more smoke. £45
-> On page 109 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Vanilla fudge, barley grist, fresh sea spray, berries, and nuts all integrated nicely. A gentle, comforting dram that accommodates many moods and situations. 

      		
 
			
 
Full gold in color, this Bunna initially has the lifted Moscatel aroma that’s reminiscent of a fine Darjeeling leaf tea, then comes melting milk chocolate and touches of sweet cinnamon toast. The palate continues in this sweet vein, but has the distillery’s characteristic thickness in the mid-palate, as well as plenty of its signature fresh ginger note. With water, there are some baked fruits and a hint of flowers. Altogether delicious and subtly complex. 
      		
 
			
 
Here’s an Islay distillery which has never quite had the investment it deserves. Hopefully this limited release is the start of an addressing of that situation. It has a classic nose with ginger (crystallized) to the fore alongside toasted almond and the balsamic note that you sometimes get with extra-mature whiskies, manifested here as mulberry vinegar. The mouth has coconut, some grip, and — though it fades a little speedily — retained fire. Take with water on the side.  £1,999 
      		
 
			
 
The Islay character is most evident in the younger whisky expressions, before the oak has tamed them. This whisky is a perfect example: an uninhibited, incredibly powerful Caol Ila, thumping out notes of tarry rope, damp peat, kippers, and seaweed. Background spices (salt, pepper, ginger) add intrigue, while a firm foundation of vanilla malt struggles to provide soothing comfort. Extreme Islay whisky. (A Binny’s Beverage Depot exclusive.) 

      		
 
			
 
Bright fruit throughout (red raspberry, strawberry-rhubarb pie, gooseberry, red currant, nectarine), honeyed malt, dark chocolate, tarry rope, seaweed soaked in olive brine, and ground pepper. Tarry finish. Nicely balanced, well-defined flavors, and fully mature at 10 years of age.
      		
 
			
 
With no great wood on show, this is a Caol Ila which is time—not oak—driven. A very scented, nay herbal start, like bouquet garni with light smoke, grapefruit, sea-washed stones, ozone, and heather blossom. The retention of aromatics is gorgeous. Water increases the peat effect but diminishes the aromatics, so take your choice. Well worth a look.
      		
 
			
 
Restrained, ozonic, with no great smokiness to open, but there is a touch of green grass behind meadow flowers and salt-washed stones so typical of the distillery. With water another marker—drying fishing nets—comes through, with breaths of the sea. Subtle and refined. More smoke on the palate, where it’s like a flowering currant bush on fire. Great balance of different elements: smoke, fragrance, oil, acidity. With water, real saltiness comes through. Very good. £99
      		
 
			
 
The now-annual unpeated release shows its high strength on the nose, but under the burn is a clean, mineral, and slightly lean Caol Ila with just a tiny whiff of smoke. A mix of grassiness/herbal notes, with delicate white fruits that plump out into tinned fruit salad, gooseberry, and fresh pineapple. The palate is sweet and cake-like, while the heat enhances its salty tang. Delightful, sweet, and long. (10,668 bottles)
      		
 
			
 
It’s good to see an official distillery bottling of Clynelish in the U.S. This one is very true to the Clynelish style: fresh, appetizing, and very drinkable. Notes of brine, fruit (lemon-lime), and vanilla-accented malt, are the foundation of this whisky. Delicate seaweed, peat, exotic pepper and a hint of citrus rind bitterness entertain the palate throughout, all the way to its appetizingly briny, seaweed-tinged finish. Perhaps the definitive aperitif whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Refill sherry hogsheads have been used to mature the latest Gordon & MacPhail bottling of Clynelish, the most northerly distillery in Diageo’s portfolio. Initially quite earthy on the nose, with mustard seeds, pepper, and contrasting malt. Becoming progressively sweeter and less complex. Quite oily in texture, the earthiness carries over from the nose onto the palate, then sweet fruit notes, malt, and spice emerge, plus a delicate thread of smoke. The finish dries slowly, with a hint of peat.
-> On page 110 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This 15 year old bottling of Diageo’s Sutherland single malt comes courtesy of The Creative Whisky Co., whose Exclusive Malts range of single cask, cask strength Scotch malt whiskies has recently been imported into the U.S. Fleeting burnt sugar on the nose, then mango and brittle toffee. Vanilla emerges, with slightly smoky malt. Finally, cloves. Mouth-coating, with lively spices, fruit and nut milk chocolate on the palate. Relatively long in the finish, with ginger snaps and a wax-like texture.
      		
 
			
 
The latest Wemyss single cask release of Clynelish from the distillery at Brora in Sutherland runs to 258 bottles and has been matured in a hogshead. Freshly-sliced green apples on the nose, slightly peppery, with grated nutmeg and salted caramels. Relatively full-bodied, with lots of soft fruit, principally Jaffa oranges, and sweet spice. Spicy caramel and cocoa powder in the slowly drying, medium-length finish. £75
      		
 
			
 
Matured in port casks. The standard Cragganmore 12 year old is one of Scotland’s best kept secrets-I enjoy its incredibly complex, dry, spicy character. The port contributes ripe fruit flavors (cherries in syrup, golden raisins, mandarin, glazed berries) which complements the dry spicy notes nicely and makes for a more balanced product. Still, for this, the whisky sacrifices some of its individuality and brilliancy with all that port. A fair trade-off, though. 

      		
 
			
 
This oft-overlooked Speysider has been frustratingly variable in the past, but now seems to have hit greater consistency. Worm tubs and weird stills combine to give a complex malt, but one that needs help from oak to blossom fully. There are hedgerow aromas: black currant leaf, hawthorn berries, and lots of honey. A chestnut note continues on the tongue where, on the finish, a hint of smoke lurks. 
      		
 
			
 
Aged in American oak for 14 years and then finished off in Spanish sherry butts for several more. A rich, lush, sherried Dalmore expression. Fruity notes of succulent orange, strawberry rhubarb tart, and sultana, on a bed of toffee and vanilla. A peppering of cinnamon, lemon rock candy, chocolate-covered coffee bean, and lavender adds complexity. Perhaps a little heavy-handed with the sherry, but still, it’s a solid effort and a Dalmore to enjoy after dinner or as a nightcap. 
      		
 
			
 
Comprising 100 percent whisky matured in oloroso sherry casks, the Tay Dram is fresh and vibrant on the nose, with fruit and toffee. Fuller bodied than the Tweed or Dee Drams, with more overt evidence of sherry, followed through by honey, almonds, coffee, and toffee. Dark chocolate is to the fore in the lengthy finish — this time closer to chocolate orange confectionery. £42 Currently not available in the U.S.
      		
 
			
 
The Dalmore has added a new expression to its Travel Retail portfolio, namely Valour. This variant carries no age statement and maturation began in first-fill bourbon casks and 30 year old Matusalem oloroso sherry butts before undergoing a finishing period in port pipes. The result is a nose of black currants, caramel, and musty sherry. The palate is medium-sweet, with damsons, Jaffa oranges, and printer’s ink. Dark berries emerge in time. The finish embraces drying spices, figs, and mildly astringent oak. 
      		
 
			
 
Style: Highland single malt scotch Color: Gold Aroma: Quite fruity (especially apples). Hint of honey and caramel with subtle background oak. Prickling alcohol before the addition of water. Palate: Smooth and mouth-coating. Nicely balanced. Delicately honeyed fruit notes up from, followed by oak and toffee, becoming dry and spicy with pleasant lingering oak. 

      		
 
			
 
Equally honeyed; in fact here the finish (oloroso this time) seems to enhance the sweetness. Out comes Manuka honey, Greek yogurt, and heavy blossom notes while the sherry itself brings in a nutty, polished note. There’s just a hint of sulfur when you add water (Dalwhinnie is a sulfury new make). The finish is long with some Brazil nut. Try frozen with dessert.
      		
 
			
 
Gold color. Aromas of toffee, nuts, and a hint of mint. Medium in body, with a malty, coating texture. The flavors evolve on the palate, with toffee up front, malty sweetness in the middle and nutty, finishing pleasantly dry with a hint of mint and vanilla. 

-> On page 111 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
A release chosen by Douglas Maclean (and named after his song “Caledonia”). Full sherry impact, but contained—not excessive or sappy. Rich, with nutty toffee, pot still rum, a variety of raisins (regular and golden), date, honeyed fruit, polished leather, and a hint of tobacco. Good resinous grip on the finish to balance the sweetness. The flavors are nicely integrated. 
      		
 
			
 
Edradour, in Perthshire, is owned by independent bottler Signatory, who has released a wide variety of expressions during the past few years. However, the standard 12 year old remains a classic of its kind.  Cider apples, malt, almonds, vanilla, and honey on the nose, along with a hint of smoke and sherry. The palate is creamy and malty, with a persistent nuttiness and quite pronounced sherry, plus a touch of leather. Spices and sherry dominate the medium to long finish. 
      		
 
			
 
Matured in a “rejuvenated European oak” cask. Balance: that’s what I like best about this whisky. It’s not as individualistic or distinctive as the others, but that’s how I always think of Glen Elgin, so no surprise here. This is a solid effort: fruity and flowery, with notes of tangerine, marmalade, caramel apple, ginger, cut grass, cinnamon, almond paste, and underlying vanilla, lingering in a satisfying finish. (534 bottles) £250
      		
 
			
 
The least well-known of the Fogwatt trio which includes Longmorn and BenRiach, it’s unlikely that Glen Elgin will become a major brand anytime soon, given how important it is to blenders. A combination of long, slow ferments, and distillation coupled with worm tubs gives a ludicrously fruity spirit, which here is bulging with ripe peach, apricot, and Galia melon coated in cinnamon and nutmeg, given thick weight by the worm tubs. A classic. £34
      		
 
			
 
Amber chestnut color. Aromas are rich and express great depth, with highlights of ripe fruit and wood spices. Well-rounded flavors are balanced very nicely, with a gentle sweetness up front that marries well with ripe fruit, becoming dry with background wood spice notes. 

      		
 
			
 
Old gold in color. Obviously an old whisky, but a delicate one that has subtle complexities; the balance between the dried grass/hayloft, the dried orange peel, and stewed apple, for example. Sweet and fragrant, it shows chypre notes with water alongside a more gentle floral aspect. The palate is drier than the nose suggests, quite mineral, with a lacy character. The finish shows melon and mint. Glen Grant in gentle repose.£88
      		
 
			
 
Deep ruby with a yellow rim. Clearly mature, and heavily sherried. A highly concentrated nose: Marmite and soy sauce, and all the fresh fruits of youth reduced to essence. Drinkwise, it’s closest to Chinato: curative barks, dried herbs (mint, hyssop, oregano). The palate is unsurprisingly thick and lightly smoky, but the tannins aren't overly astringent, and there remains a sweet core still, even if the overall effect is dark. It’s not obviously Glen Grant, but it is a fascinating glass.
      		
 
			
 
Bright gold color. Big and firm on the palate. Quite fruity too (tangerine, pear, sultana, pineapple), on a dry malty foundation. Lighter notes of grass, hay, linseed oil, and dried vanilla add complexity. Dried fruit and malt finish. A really nice dram with gobs of character.
      		
 
			
 
Glen Scotia has always been the bridesmaid to Springbank. This is justifiable, considering that both production and availability of quality bottlings have been sporadic over the past decade or so. I like this one. It really shows the simple, coastal pleasantness of this Campbeltown distillery. Ripe malty notes are accompanied by brine, cut hay, banana cream pie, and honeyed vanilla. Lingering salty, malty finish. With all the sherried and wine-finished Springbanks recently on the market (not that there’s anything wrong with that), here’s a nice, no-frills, Campbeltown whisky. 
      		
 
			
 
The nose gives a whiff of vanilla fudge, then black pepper, sea salt, and a savory note develops. The palate yields maritime-tinged candied fruits and effervescent smoke. Slightly tarry in the finish. Macho!
-> On page 112 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Whiskies in Douglas Laing’s new Old Particular range are non-chill filtered and bottled at three strengths, with those aged 19 years and over being offered at 51.5%. This Glen Scotia was distilled in May 1992 and boasts a nose of violets, musky malt, soft smoke, and a fresh sea breeze. Big, spicy, and quite oily on the palate, with dark berries, black tea, and a note of tar. Long and dark in the finish, with oak tannins and persistent licorice. £85
      		
 
			
 
Although this distillery is operating, it remains one of the hardest Speyside whiskies to find. This is unfortunate. A fairly straight-forward whisky-pleasingly malty and somewhat viscous on the palate, with some grassy notes. The extra years, with this particular bottling anyway, have allowed the whisky to blossom, become a little more intriguing and heavier. Along with malt and grassy notes, I’m picking up citrus fruit (especially on the nose), toffee, nuts, freshly ground roasted cocoa beans, nougat, and vanilla fudge. 

      		
 
			
 
This is a single cask (#729) bottling, distilled in 1982, and the outturn was just 260 bottles. Soft and supple on the waxy nose, with worn leather, Jaffa oranges, and malt. Lots of leather, with brittle toffee, orange creams, and a slightly musty note on the full palate. Mouth-drying in the lengthy finish, but the tannins never come close to overwhelming. £280
      		
 
			
 
Over the past decade there has been no shortage of Glendronach expressions. I know of at least one 15 year old, an 18 year old, a 19 year old, a 1968 vintage, and four different 12 year old versions. My favorite of the range was the limited edition 19 year old released here in the U.S. about a decade ago. The 1968 Vintage, which you can still find on retailers’ shelves, is also a worthy dram. But this new 12 year old “Original” expression is certainly my favorite of the 12s (and the 15). I feel that Glendronach expresses itself best when it is not dominated by the sherry, allowing a greater balance of flavors. This whisky was originally matured in sherry casks, but was then (fortunately) aged in bourbon casks for the remainder of its maturation. The result? A richly flavored, nicely balanced whisky expressing notes of sherried fruit, burnt caramel, light toffee, and nuts, all underpinned by a soothing malty foundation. Yum! 

      		
 
			
 
The rich, sweet Sauternes dessert wine adds its signature. Quite lush, with golden raisin, crème brûlée, rhubarb pie, honey-kissed citrus, and creamy vanilla. A lovely example of a dessert whisky — comforting, warming, and embracing. (I would also enjoy this after a brunch of crepes, fresh fruit, and maple syrup.) 
      		
 
			
 
This is a refill (or in 'Farclas terms, ‘plain’) hogshead, so there is less wood on show and more distillery. The nose is like a gentleman’s club at lunchtime: roasting meat, some pipe tobacco, polished wood, and the scent of a freshly-dug garden wafting through the windows. The palate shows slightly more fresh fruitiness (in line with the 1971 cask). There’s decent grip; think treacle this time. Fluxes and changes, which makes it all the more intriguing. £246
      		
 
			
 
A refill hogshead this time, which when combined with its (relative) youth throws the distillery character into even greater focus. Positively light to start with, a green edge to the dry grass seen in the 1970s and more of the fruity notes hinted at in the 1982. All the time, though, it is anchored by meaty earthiness and that distinctive burnt note. The finish is a little short, but all in all a very appetizing example. £250 
      		
 
			
 
This comes from a refill butt and has a light, paler color. The lack of huge oak interaction has given an amazing freshness; think of freshly-applied plaster, syrup, hot green bracken, a touch of nuttiness. It takes water well, allowing pure, soft fruits to come through, and it is these which become almost syrup-like in the mouth, while never losing Glenfarclas’ central depth and roasty richness in the center. £865
      		
 
			
 
Surprisingly pale (you see the issue, Macallan?), but long aging in refill casks helps eliminate the bluntness of oak and can produce aromas that have been reduced and then taken into an exotic realm; here manifested as quince paste and kumquat followed by crystallized and candied fruits. The palate is subtle and soft with light heat, toasted chocolate, white currant, and then overwhelming cherry blossom. Exotic is the word. Bottled for China, but may be given a wider release. £3,000
      		
 
			
 
One of a trio of new whiskies that have spent time in Glenfiddich’s new solera vats, this will surprise many because of its overt smokiness that’s like a bonfire in a pear orchard. Some ferny greenness adds to the freshness. The reverse happens on the palate, with the smoke being held in check by the soft mouthfeel (which could be solera-enhanced), ripe fruits, and gentle creaminess.
£70
-> On page 113 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
One of two new Glen Garioch vintages to be produced under the auspices of Morrison Bowmore Distillers’ master blender Rachel Barrie, this 1995 offering is due to appear in the U.S. next year. 1,000 cases are available and maturation has taken place in first-fill bourbon casks. Spice, vanilla, pears, honey, and very discreet smoke on the nose. Hazelnuts, baked bananas, apple strudel, and lots of spice on the sweet creamy palate, backed up by a gentle note of lingering char. £55
      		
 
			
 
Wemyss Malts has bottled this 23 year old hogshead-matured example of Glen Garioch from the Aberdeenshire village of Oldmeldrum. Just 322 bottles were yielded by the cask. Cigarette tobacco, brittle toffee, and a hint of aniseed on the nose. Vanilla develops, along with strawberries, apples, and pears. Rich malt, walnuts, cooked apple, and cinnamon on the palate. The spicy finish features old leather and pepper. £105
      		
 
			
 
This malt is actually 36 years old, having spent its first 34 years in a refill hogshead before two years of maturation in a first fill ex-Sauternes cask. The out-turn was 280 bottles. Mellow on the nose, with fresh oranges and apples, developing toffee, and violets. Smooth and fruity on the palate, with dark chocolate, pepper, and discreet tannins. Long in the finish, with fruity oak. £400
      		
 
			
 
While younger Glengoyne whiskies are enjoyable but often fairly straight-forward in flavor, the older expressions develop nicely in depth. Regardless of age, there’s always a creamy maltiness as the foundation of the whisky. For this expression, notes of honey, cookie dough, dry spice notes (vanilla, cinnamon) and soft fruit (citrus, apple) round out the palate. This whisky is clean, polished, and very drinkable. A new addition to the Glengoyne line, and very welcome. 

      		
 
			
 
Deep gold color. A very delightful aroma that defies its age, with notes of rich creamy vanilla, exotic tropical fruit, honey, and toasted oak. Rich, mouth coating texture and body. Its flavor starts out like its aroma-creamy vanilla, tropical fruit, honey-then turns dry and becomes very dry, leathery, and oaky on the finish. Soothing, long dry finish. 

      		
 
			
 
I enjoy Glenlivet whisky for its subtle elegance, floral notes, along with a delicious "peaches & cream" flavor. For this particular whisky, finishing some of the whisky in new French oak barrels adds depth, dried spice (vanilla, clove) and pleasing dryness to the Glenlivet profile. This whisky is more polished and refined than the 12 year old expression it replaces. 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Highland single malt scotch Color: Gold Aroma: Subtly complex and somewhat dry, with notes of vanilla, almonds, hay, freshly cut grass, and a hint of smoke. Palate: Clean and malty up front, becoming dry as it begins to reveal its age, as the maltiness turns into a potpourri of spice and dried fruit. Dry on the finish and spicy-almost peppery. Its finish is big and long for a Glenmorangie whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Finished in port casks. Like the Nectar D’or above, this expression adds lushness, body, and a sweet complexity (but with darker fruit and spice than the Nectar D’or) while still allowing Glenmorangie’s complexity to shine through. 

      		
 
			
 
Amber gold color. Rich, honeyed malt in aroma. Quite floral, with subtle notes of dried fruit. Full, rich body. Very malty flavors, with notes of honeyed fruit up front, turning dry on the finish with notes of oak, vanilla, and dried fruit. 

      		
 
			
 
Very bright and lively, with a nice balance of flavors. Zesty fruit (lemon, peach, ripe pineapple, golden raisin) on a bed of layered sweetness (creamy vanilla, light honey, lightly toasted marshmallow, and a hint of coconut). Gently dry, delicately spicy, dried citrus finish. Light enough and with enough zing to enjoy before dinner, but it should stand up well enough after dinner, too. This is a nice whisky, but it shows a lighter, more elegant side of Glenrothes. It doesn’t express the rich, opulent notes often shown in bottlings like the 1972 Vintage, for example.
-> On page 114 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Though this has been on the shelves in the UK for a while, its U.S. release has been delayed. It shows a classic mature ‘Rothes nose, mixing moist fruitcake, vanilla, and a tickle of maltiness. What sets this apart is the weight of the stewed fruit and a dry note reminiscent of light rain on tweed. The palate is typically slow with a sparky spiciness and a lick of hazelnut butter to caress your throat. Worth the wait. 
      		
 
			
 
A new NAS, this has a thick, silky nose in classic ‘Rothes style which reminds you of coffee cream icing, hazelnut syrup, semi-dried soft fruits, and horchata. The palate has elegance and poise, with a hint of menthol lifting off into pecan and light grippy oak. Has excellent length and mellow flow. Water slightly reduces its voluptuous charms, so be careful (or simply avoid). Praise for revealing all the vintages used, and the fantastic price. Chapeau! £39
      		
 
			
 
A comparatively rare independent bottling of what is, in any case, a hard to find single malt. Distilled in 1990, matured in an American oak hogshead (#646), and bottled at cask strength. White pepper, damp earth, violets, cinnamon, and slight saltiness on the nose. The pepper blackens on the idiosyncratic palate, with cough syrup, big spice notes, and dark berries. Long and peppery in the finish, with developing oak tannins.
      		
 
			
 
The only sherry cask-aged Rarest of the Rare whisky reviewed here. Rich thick cut marmalade, combined with chewy toffee, sultana, and nuts. The oak adds spice, balance, and complexity. This isn’t a one-trick (sherry) pony. There’s a lot going on here. Spicy, resinous finish. One of the best Glenugies I have tasted. 

      		
 
			
 
The darkest and most decadent of the three 15 year olds here. Notes of molasses, demerara rum, apricot, and dates. More subtle notes of mixed nuts, sap, tobacco, and fig, with just a hint of Moroccan spice and leather. Surprisingly complex for a whisky this young, and the most intriguing of the younger expressions reviewed here. (Bottled for Beltramo’s Fine Wines & Spirits) 

      		
 
			
 
Deep gold color. Nicely balanced aroma of honeyed malt, fruit, floral notes, and a hint of the sea. Medium in body and smooth. The palate begins with soothing honey notes, followed by a rich maltiness. Ripe fruit flavors emerge, lush and delicious. The whisky eventually becomes dry and floral, with a suggestion of salt. 

      		
 
			
 
Following on from Thor, Loki is the second release in Highland Park’s Valhalla Collection. Loki has been matured in a mix of sherry and heavily-peated casks. Initial notes of marzipan on the nose, then orange, oriental spices, and chili. In time, yellow plums, vanilla, and floral notes. Soft and sweet on the palate, with pink grapefruit, overt smoke, and a touch of salt. The finish features contrasting barbecue and vanilla notes, citrus, and lots of spice.
      		
 
			
 
Amber copper color. Very mature aroma of oak, damp earth, peat smoke, licorice, soft citrus, and seaweed. Full-bodied and somewhat oily. A gently sweet vanilla note up front-albeit very briefly-then a quick flash of citrus fruit and seaweed. After that it's a battle between peat smoke and oak, with the oak ultimately winning. Very long, dry, smoky finish.
      		
 
			
 
Matured in a sherry cask. Chock full of ripe fruit, but still quite feminine in personality. Firm malt foundation, almost buttery in texture, with juicy oak, maple syrup, raspberry (red and black), strawberry, and dates, peppered with gentle spice (cinnamon, ginger). While this is a very enjoyable whisky, I have tasted some excellent Linkwood bottlings, including the standard 12 year old from back in the early 1990s, that brandished less sherry, allowing more of Linkwood’s gentle nature to blossom. Still, the sherry influence here is pristine, and it gives as much as it masks. (430 bottles)£200
      		
 
			
 
The combination of Linkwood and sherry cask can be to the detriment of such a perfumed whisky. Not here. The nose speaks of caramel toffee, demerara sugar, and while an oaky touch is there it’s light, allowing plump sultanas, rose, and a delightful balsamic cider vinegar note to emerge. The palate is relaxed and gentle, with darker fruits. There’s sufficient body to cope with the tannic squeeze. It needs water to reach ideal balance. Lovely. £65
-> On page 115 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The latest incarnation of Springbank’s Longrow Red matured for 11 years in port casks before being bottled at cask strength. The nose is sweet, with cherries, caramel, new leather, chewing tobacco, and soft peat. Voluptuous in the mouth, with a palate of rich peat, summer berries, and toffee apples, with growing spice notes, and light oak. Lengthy in the finish, with cinnamon, peat, sweet oak, and red berries.
      		
 
			
 
Longmorn always has this fruitcake thing going on and this is no exception. A sherry hoggie  helped provide sultana, cake mix, grilled almond, rhubarb puree, and a little cigar box. The palate is very fruity, with light Darjeeling-like tannins, then red fruits. It becomes nuttier as it moves and needs water to add ripeness to the stone fruit base. Highly recommended and extremely well priced. £80
      		
 
			
 
Amber mahogany color. Its 50 years of age are evident in the nose-there's plenty of resinous wood spice notes (especially clove). Also on the nose is citrus (especially orange), a potpourri of dried fruit, light toffee, and a hint of smoked nuts. The body is thick and viscous. The palate expresses flavors similar to its aroma, finishing dry and long.
      		
 
			
 
A vatting of sherry casks from (apparently) royally significant dates with an outturn of 2012 (get it?) bottles. Auburn in color, it has a fruit compote nose mixed with citrus, and a little hint of gravy browning in the background. This mix of the exotic—oil of clove on the tongue, the sweet and light grip—makes for a very intriguing, concentrated, and layered palate. Think of Turkish Delight and crystallized ginger. Try the distillery shop for stock. £350
      		
 
			
 
Straw gold color. Very mature aromas of oak and citrus, with a hint of smoke, dry vanilla, floral and spice notes. Flavors are very mature and fairly dry throughout, mirroring the aroma’s dominant oaky vanilla notes, with citrus, and subtle smoke. Long, lingering finish. 

      		
 
			
 
In one word: exotic. In some respects, it is reminiscent of a very old column-distilled Jamaican rum, and a lot of the wood spices really express themselves. Like the Compass Box whisky above, this whisky again proves that grain whiskies should not be ignored. They taste completely different than other whiskies-particularly the older ones-and they can be a lot of fun to drink. The two reviewed in this buyer’s guide are very fine examples of the style. 

      		
 
			
 
Scotland’s northernmost mainland distillery, located in the historic port of Wick, is owned by Inver House. The ‘entry level’ 12 year old expression is widely available. The nose presents pleasingly fresh malt and floral notes, with a touch of pine. The palate offers a fuller bodied, sweeter whisky than the nose might lead one to expect, with more malt, spices, fresh fruit, and a suggestion of salt. The finish is medium in length, drying, and decidedly nutty.
      		
 
			
 
Gordon & MacPhail bottled a 21 year old expression from Scotland’s northernmost mainland distillery for the U.S. market earlier this year. Sweet on the nose, with honey and vanilla; fleetingly, stewed apricots and peaches, plus a hint of caramel. Intensely focused, sweet tropical fruits on the palate, with barley sugar. Becoming nuttier, with an edge of mixed spices. Spice fading to milk chocolate in the medium-length finish, with just a suggestion of brine. 
      		
 
			
 
Maturation of the Pentland Skerries bottling of the Lighthouse Collection has taken place exclusively in former Spanish sherry casks, which lends the nose rich, dark sherry and Christmas cake notes, caramel and old leather, along with the distillery’s characteristic saltiness, which here comes across as salted peanuts. Full-bodied and slick in the mouth, overt sherry, sultanas, figs, spice, and contrasting brine. Mild maritime notes and autumn fruits combine with prunes and sherry in an accomplished, after-dinner finish. £55/liter
      		
 
			
 
Here’s a classical Port Ellen, where the intense, even monomaniacal delivery of smoke mixes with damp face flannel, purple smoke, green ferns, and rapeseed oil. Lots of minerality, to the point of being almost flintily uncompromising. Water makes it more naked. The palate is excellent, with an explosion of preserved lemon-accented smokiness, touches of Spanish paprika, a sweet syrupy center, before a massive licorice finish. Peatiness for the purist, but whenever was that different? 
-> On page 116 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Delicately floral (lavender, rose) and perfumed, with notes of chamomile, hay, soft vanilla and gentle malt. Creamy and soothing, with a gently dry finish. Lots of depth for a lighter weight whisky. A lovely aperitif. I feel Rosebank is freshest and best when it is young. With the distillery closing in 1993, now’s the time to act, and this is one of the better bottlings I’ve tasted. 

      		
 
			
 
Antique gold color. Mature aromas of creamy vanilla, thick coconut, oak, and a hint of mint. The classic Springbank sea breeze aroma struggles for recognition. Medium body and oily in texture. Flavors deliver what the aroma promises, with additional dry wood spices and a very long finish. 

      		
 
			
 
A round of single cask Springers matured completely (not finished) in various wine casks for the U.S. market. All four are solid efforts — it’s really a matter of personal preference. A general comment: most of the single cask releases are matured in some sort of wine or rum cask. While this is nice, I would love to see several single cask, cask strength, and fully-matured ex-bourbon barrel bottlings offered for a change. 

Citrus, exotic wood, and botanicals on the nose and palate. Indeed, there’s a bit of intrigue here. Nice balance, with roasted nuts, pecan pie, and more exotic wood on the finish. 
      		
 
			
 
This expression from the Campbeltown distillery of Springbank was distilled in April 2000, matured for six years in refill bourbon barrels, and then for another six years in Calvados casks. The outturn was 9,420 bottles. Toffee apples dipped in soft spices on the nose, with a follow through of vanilla. Quite viscous on the palate, with white wine, red peppers, and cinnamon, along with a tang of peat. Lime marmalade and a touch more peat in the relatively dry finish.  
      		
 
			
 
As part of a rebranding of the entire Talisker range, Diageo has brought its Special Releases 25 and 30 year old cask strength expressions into the full-time fold, reduced in strength to 45.8%. Sweet and buttery on the nose; soft fruits and fragrant malt, milk chocolate, and dry, crumbling peat. Citrus fruits (notably lemon), licorice sticks, black pepper, and scorched wood on the palate. Dry and oaky in the lengthy finish, with peat notes and allspice to the end. £300 
      		
 
			
 
This no age statement Talisker is one of the first “triple matured” (so-named) whiskies exclusive to Friends of The Classic Malts. Successive periods of aging occurred in refill casks, charred American oak hogsheads, and European oak refill casks. Ozone, fresh asphalt, dried fruits, and old leather on the nose. A big pepper hit in the mouth, backed by earthy peat, Elastoplast, vanilla, and citrus fruits. The pepper lasts right to the end in the long, steadily-drying, charcoal-fueled finish. £80
      		
 
			
 
Deep amber/chestnut/crimson color, suggesting a good dose of sherry cask aging, which the palate confirms. Syrupy notes of fruitcake, burnt fig, raisin, and beeswax are balanced by resinous oak, polished leather, roasted nuts, and dried spice on the finish. The 37 years of oak impact is balanced nicely by the sherry, even if both are a bit extreme for what is normally a more elegant dram. 

      		
 
			
 
Straw gold. Aromas of a sweet shop-vanilla, honey, marshmallow, and confectioner’s sugar. Light to medium body, and soft. Clean flavors, which are very malty and honeyed, with notes of marshmallow and vanilla. Gently sweet finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Fuller in body, deeper and more complex than the 12 year old (as would be expected). Sweeter fruits (honey-laced citrus, lemon gum drops, and ripe peach) and rum notes marry nicely with dried spice (cinnamon, vanilla, ginger). Calming finish. An intelligent use of sherry cask aging. 

      		
 
			
 
Bold and spicy, but with enough backbone to handle it. Surely the most intense of the bunch overall. (The 25 year old is dry on the palate -- especially on the finish -- but the 30 year old challenges you the throughout.) There’s plenty of oak here, imparting leather, resin, and dried spice notes (cinnamon, clove, vanilla), but it is rescued by sherried fruit, honeyed citrus, and toffee. A powerful dram.
-> On page 117 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This veteran example of Tomatin was distilled in November 1967 and matured for 45 years in refill butt #9315. The outturn was
175 bottles. Uncompromising dark sherry and treacle notes on the fruity nose, along with gunpowder tea. Big, old sherry notes on the full palate, with raisins, sultanas, and a sprinkling of black pepper. Fruity, notably spicy, and not too drying for its age in a relatively supple finish. £230
      		
 
			
 
This vintage expression from Tomatin has been matured in a mix of bourbon and port casks, and is being released in batches. The first comprises 2,500 bottles. The soft, fragrant nose offers strawberries, apricots, honey, and caramel, with a final hint of dry port. Fruit and caramel notes carry over from the nose onto the palate before dark chocolate appears, along with a suggestion of smoke. Subtle oak and ginger in the lengthy finish.
      		
 
			
 
Tomatin launched the peated Cù Bòcan expression last year, and follows it with a vintage variant, the result of “…a rare and unintentional production of peated whisky at the distillery on 7
 June 1989.” Three bourbon casks yielded 1,080 bottles. Ripe apples and aerosol furniture polish, with a vanilla and sweet woodsmoke backdrop on the nose. Full-bodied, with intense, sweet fruit notes on the palate, and a heathery, smoky kick. Smoky spice and nutty flavors in the ultimately drying finish. £200
      		
 
			
 
Antique gold. Thought-provoking aromas and flavors of molasses, leather, vanilla, and wood spices, with a hint of bourbon and rum. Light to medium in body. Given that this whisky is so mature and rather light in body, it has held up very well-the woody dryness is balanced nicely by the sweetness of the grain. 

      		
 
			
 
A blend of bourbon, rye, and peated single malt Scotch whiskies. This is an adaptation of the original release that spent additional time in Hungarian and French oak barrels. The finishing produces a creamier, smoother, more rounded, more mature, and improved version of Campfire, showing notes of honey, vanilla, dark berries, soft mint, and smoke. Distinctive and unique. 
      		
 
			
 
One of the best kept secrets in rye whiskey. Not quite as refined as the Sazerac Rye 6 year old, but it makes up for it in its sheer brute force. It is darker, deeper, and more rustic (but in a good way). Chewy toffee and dark molasses balance the spicy rye notes and soothe the alcohol heat. 

      		
 
			
 
The follow up to the 21 year old expression reviewed a year or two ago. I prefer the 21 year old (which I scored a 92) over this 23 year old. While a dynamic, entertaining rye whiskey of massive structure (toffee, maple syrup, pancake batter, and Play Doh leading to leather, tobacco, oak resin, mint, and cinnamon), its age starts to show towards the finish, becoming dry and a bit ornery.
      		
 
			
 
Deep and complex, yet still quite lovely for an 18 year old whisky. Not as a lush and sweet as its younger sibling (Thomas H.Handy), showing more oak, dried spice, and a certain degree of sophistication. Toffee and molasses are quickly matched and then dominated by notes of brittle mint, vanilla, cinnamon, dried fruit, and black raspberry leading to a long, earthy, resinous, polished leather finish. The last great vintage of Sazerac Rye 18 year old was 2005, which was impeccably balanced and still displayed great youthful qualities. The three vintages since then, including this one, are similar in flavor profile and, while still very nice whiskeys, show just a tad too much oak and lethargy to reach the classic status of the 2005 release.
      		
 
			
 
At present this is a distillery-only bottling, but we need to start a campaign to get it on general release, because it is a modestly-priced gem of a malt whisky. This is fruit compote in a glass, with blueberry, blackberry, rose petal talcum powder, and redcurrant on the nose, and strawberry jam and summer fruit cordial on the palate. It's a palate cleanser, all soft, fresh, and fruity. Summer's arrived early. £30
      		
 
			
 
A distillery-only bottling last year, and I'm delighted it's now more widely available. Penderyn is as brash about portwood as the Aussies, and this has a rich, creamy, and sweet liqueur-like taste, with blackcurrant to the fore. It's a delight. Penderyn is bottled in batches, so this is a different version from last year’s, but it's close. I called it fruit compote in a glass. £36
-> On page 118 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This wintery limited edition was finished in casks that previously held Bordeaux, Glühwein, and sherry. This achieves an appealing nose of orchard fruits and spices. Juicy apple, hints of conference pear, cinnamon, clove, vanilla tablet, and lemon pith. Apple is at the core of the flavor, but it’s rich with warming spices, strawberry, and zabaglione, tightening in the end to a conclusion of dried fruits, nut shells, and a twist of pepper. 
€65
      		
 
			
 
Meaning Swedish smoke, and they’ve nailed the juniper smoke perfectly here. Ripening lemons, fresh cream, Turkish delight, pine forests, and barley sugar aromas. Great poise and balance. A light, lacey structure comprising creamy fudge, honey, lemon, oak, and vanilla. It just dances on the tongue. Yet billowing puffs of smoke pulse from the center. Baked lemon peel ushers in a pleasurable rolling, smoky finish. This Röks! €59
      		
 
			
 
Deep on the nose and palate, with notes of dark rum, dried fruit, roasted nuts, dark chocolate, cinnamon, polished leather, charcoal, and a suggestion of peat.  Dry, resinous finish.  Bonus points for intrigue.

      		
 
			
 
A marriage of two whiskies: 30% 18 year old Caol Ila finished in Chateau d’Yquem Sauternes casks and 70% 10 year old Bowmore finished in Grenache wine casks. A honeyed, sultana sweetness (from the d’Yquem?) nicely tames the rooty smoke, iodine, seaweed, brine, pepper, and subtle Spanish olive. Bramble and berried fruit (from the Grenache?) add another layer and dimension. A very dynamic whisky, worthy of exploring and debating how well all these flavors integrate with each other.
      		
 
			
 
Peat smoke indeed, and it dovetails nicely with light toffee, vanilla, anise, charred oak, blackberry, seaweed, kalamata olive, brine, and peppercorn. Well balanced from start to lingering smoke finish, and very exciting. (Exclusive to the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Glenrothes always has a spicy element, but this example ups the ante considerably and, true to the label, it’s fresh-cut ginger root alongside galangal and coriander, a hint of green grass, and even a little bite of jelly babies, alongside black currant leaf. Rothes’ normally languid air is here frothily exuberant, with just sufficient vanilla thickness to offer a brake. Uplifting and good. £107
      		
 
			
 
Sweet oak and cod liver oil are what greet you, with fleshy, lychee-like fruits
behind. The smoke here is very polite, giving way to fruit jelly cubes and
peaches, to develop alongside crisp apple. The palate is clean with nutty oak, with
the smoke continuing in the background, offering an extra layer of complexity.
Fresh, belying its age, while it has typical tongue-coating oiliness it remains
understated. Caol Ila basking in the summer sun.
      		
 
			
 
The nose is sweet (think barley sugar/boiled sweets) with little bits of wheat chaff flying around in the background with dried flower petals and drying cut grass. Opens dramatically with water into almond milk/horchata and flowers. The palate is sweet and lifted with those gentle florals to the fore. Instead of Tormore’s normal nagging rigidity, this flows sweetly over the tongue, leaving fruit leather, stewed rhubarb, and with water, rosewater and fresh wild strawberry. A lovely Tormore! £118
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in 1986, this single cask from Blair Athol distillery in Perthshire yielded 268 bottles, and the nose offers sweet fruits, principally apple and orange, plus walnuts, vanilla, and brittle toffee. Becoming softer and creamier with time. Dark fruit notes on the palate, notably blackcurrants and cranberries, with caramel and cinnamon. The finish is quite viscous, with a little oak, freshly-squeezed lemons, and licorice twists. £85 
      		
 
			
 
Rye whiskey has gone hip. This is a new offering from Beam Global Spirits and Wines, but it is not part of the Jim Beam portfolio. It will be its own new entity. It's crisp and vibrantly spicy, but with a rich, silky sweetness that marries very well with the rye intensity. It is exactly what I think it was designed to be: a mature enough rye whiskey that can be enjoyed neat or on the rocks, but with plenty of youth and vitality to zing in a cocktail. I tasted it next to a couple of the other ''entry level'' straight rye whiskeys to confirm this isn't all just fancy packaging, and it is indeed a superior product. No, it's not one of those ultra-aged rye whiskeys on the market, but it wasn't meant to be either. A nice whiskey, but pricey for a rye with no age statement.

-> On page 119 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Lombard’s blend of Speyside malts pleases with an agreeable nose of orchard blossoms, flower honey, caramel, dry hay, and pears baked in brown granulated sugar. It’s homey and comforting, favoring its floral and fruity side
This is a light, sweet whisky that sweeps around the mouth, radiating maltiness, apple, grapefruit, dried mango strips, and mingling spices. A studiously long finish of sucked caramel candy and beeswax follows. A smart choice for the beginning of the evening. £30
      		
 
			
 
Originally created by Lombard for the Freemasons, this has a flavorsome nose of dark chocolate chip cookies, light spices, coconut macaroons, malt, and bright, fresh bananas. The palate is light and unobtrusive, with honey and malt reinforced by the spices running underneath. A shift develops to some later cocoa and chocolate notes, and the mocha finish fades gracefully. A finely balanced concoction, and you will rarely find this quality and flavor for the price
      		
 
			
 
Aged in both refill and new bourbon casks. The new bourbon casks are evident, and I think it adds richness, vibrancy, and perceived maturity (which I like) when compared to the previous Summer 2010 release. Very pale in color. Brooding, with licorice root, coal tar, bacon fat, damp peat, bright fruit (citrus and pear), and intriguing botanicals, all on a soothing bed of vanilla malt. Smoky, briny finish. I’m still amazed how this very young whisky can taste so mature. Well done! 
      		
 
			
 
The only Islay distillery not on the coast — and the most westerly on the island — Kilchoman is reviving the tradition of farm distilling, and this limited edition release uses locally grown Optic barley malted at the distillery. Very creamy, with some stewed apple, green banana, and (when diluted) sponge cake mix. The smoke develops on the palate, adding an earthy note. Rich, with some clove and licorice on the finish. Well worth a look. 
      		
 
			
 
Here you have the sweetness of rising bread alongside scallop and wreathes of smoke, all lit by west coast sunshine; the peat isn’t dank, but bright and flaming. The palate is sweetly seductive before the smoke begins to come through, then it sweetens like golden syrup, then the shore comes back, and so it continues. Water ups the impact of each, so be careful, as it can then seem disconnected. Sweet, beachy, smoky. Very Islay.
      		
 
			
 
This strikes me as being the most overtly smoky of Kilchoman’s recent bottlings, and also the sweetest. Intense and very forward, there’s baked apple, humidor notes, honeydew melon, fresh shellfish. Water brings out a putty-like youthfulness, so take it neat. The palate is amazingly sweet (think golden syrup), then the smoke folds itself over. A good—and well-priced—introduction for newcomers.
£45
      		
 
			
 
So nice to see this whisky available here in the U.S. again. A more mature, more sherried expression of the standard Royal Lochnagar. Rich, silky, and sweet, with molasses, nutty toffee, old demerara pot still rum, caramelized fig, marmalade, and juicy oak. More subtle notes of honeyed ginger, coffee grounds, and tobacco leaf add complexity. A soothing post-prandial dram.
      		
 
			
 
Each independent bottler has its own signature style. Adelphi’s is about relaxed, contemplative drams with rich maturity and a certain seriousness. Here you see this, plus crème brûlée, sitting in front of a sandalwood backdrop with a bunch of basil mint thrown in. The opening is slow, and while the inherent sweet nature of the distillery is there, hazelnuttish oak helps to add structure and stops any flabbiness from intruding. A luscious dram. £99
      		
 
			
 
St. George’s hits pay dirt! The competition is fierce for young, big, oily, heavily peated whiskies: Kilchoman, Connemara Turf Mor, BenRiach Birnie Moss. This, though, is good enough to mix it in that sort of company. The peat growls like a Harley-Davidson, punches pepper and peat throughout, but best of all, it flicks licorice and hickory kisses just like a real life Laphroaig. Chapter 11 isn’t quite in that league yet…but it’s certainly moving in the right direction. £65 (Currently not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
You'll struggle to find this, as it has been snapped up quickly, but if you can, don't miss out. This whisky was originally made by Iain Henderson, is bottled at 5 years old, and marks a significant step forward for this fledgling distillery. The sappy notes have retreated and are being replaced by a wonderful sweet lemon and creamy vanilla whisky. The pinprick pepper adds a delightful dimension. £65 
-> On page 120 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This is set to be the first proper release into the American market, and it's a good introduction point, with all the distillery characteristics on display and a delightful rustic peat base to set it all off. On the nose there is trademark sweet citrus and cracked pepper, though they're joined here by milk chocolate and creamed lime, and on the palate there's sweet lemon and lime sherbet, fruit cordial, and peat. £50
      		
 
			
 
Another Royal occasion, another excuse for a new bottling, but this one justifies its existence because it brings tropical fruit and spice to the English whisky party. The nose is nothing to get excited about, but there's rich pureed pear and some orange peel on the palate, melon sweetness, and cloves and cinnamon. It wraps up with some pleasant rustic earthiness. £80
      		
 
			
 
Regauged into once-used bourbon barrels, this is not the WhistlePig of old. Four years’ finishing in Vermont has toned down the sweetness and high notes, emphasizing a complex, leather/dark chocolate/tobacco spectrum instead. Lavender, violets, and ripe red fruit rise over dusty-dry barn boards, blue clay, and dark rye bread. The spicy rye tones glow with white pepper, while hints of astringent barrel oak keep a slight slipperiness from clinging.
      		
 
			
 
Based in the village of Baarle-Nassau in the Netherlands, the Zuidam distillery was built by genever distiller Fred Van Zuidam in 2002 and is now run by his son Patrick, who started distilling at the age of 14. His single malt is made from windmill-ground barley, given temperature-controlled fermentation, distilled in Holstein stills, and aged in new oak for a period before being racked into older casks. A rich amber color, this expression is ripe and fruity with plenty of red cherry, a little hint of fig, and a little sweet spice. Balanced and rich with a fresh citric farewell this is a classy arrival on the world scene. £59
      		
 
			
 
Two out of three ain't bad. While Kavalan doesn't quite pull off the hat trick, this is no album filler either (can we still say that?). It is Karaoke Kavalan, Taiwanese X Factor whisky: a perfect reproduction of a big, plummy, pruney, tannin-soaked rich fruit compote with late fall damp forest notes. It says a lot about this distillery that five years ago we'd have marveled at this. Today, and by its own standards, it's Kavalan doing an Aerosmith ballad.
      		
 
			
 
While much of the interest in Australian whisky has focused on Tasmania, there are mainland distilleries, such as The Great Southern Distilling Company and this one, which have been making a major contribution to the country’s growing whisky reputation. In fact, David Baker’s malt is as good as anything in Australasia. This is a Scotch-style single malt, all clean fresh green fruit, particularly apples, and some orange. The taste is zingy, with almonds and sweet chocolate-covered digestive biscuits. Delicious. AUD105 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
This is the latest in an ongoing series of releases of whisky distilled at the Campbeltown distillery of Glengyle, and now aged 8 years. Just 9,000 bottles are available. The nose is full, with over-ripe oranges, warm honey, and custard. On the palate, the oranges are fresher and livelier, with vanilla, hard toffee, and a slightly citric fruit edge to balance the sweetness. That sweetness carries over into the spicy finish, which is quite lengthy, with a lick of licorice. £35
      		
 
			
 
Having released four previous “work in progress” expressions of Kilkerran, 2013 sees the launch of two editions, one matured in sherry casks and the other in bourbon barrels. The sherry-aged variant yields overripe green grapes and figs on the nose, followed by honey and plain chocolate, while the palate is quite full, softly fruity, with soft toffee and a hint of brine. The finish dries significantly, with cocoa powder, licorice, and lots of spice. £38
      		
 
			
 
The latest releases from Glengoyne distillery are 10 year olds, one matured in sherry wood and one in bourbon barrels, as was the case with release 5. 9,000 bottles are available globally. Initially savory on the nose, slightly earthy, with sherry, new leather, lemonade, and a hint of ozone. Spicy and zesty, with developing stewed fruits, dark chocolate, and deep sherry notes on the palate. The finish is long and persistently spicy, mildly smoky, with quite dry sherry notes.
      		
 
			
 
Soft, elegant, and nicely rounded, with honeyed orchard fruit and gentle spice on a bed of vanilla and caramel. Very versatile; a pleasing, unchallenging bourbon to suit most moods and situations. I actually like it better than the new, older 10 year old expression (reviewed in this issue), because it is so beautifully balanced. 
-> On page 121 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Not burning my nose; mild bread and vanilla aromas. Peppy stuff, but not explosive on the palate; easily held five seconds on the tongue, but fiery once it gets aerated. Sweet grain with a big saw-toothed edge of cinnamon and hot vanilla, and a circling brim of zingy mint that tightens toward the finish. Pretty interesting stuff for wheat whiskey; a more expressive nose would seal the deal. Price is per 375ml.
      		
 
			
 
Following on from the earlier 8 year old expression of this triple distilled Campbeltown malt, the 12 year old first appeared in August 2009 and nicely illustrates the developments brought about by its continuing maturation. Rich on the nose, with a clear sherry influence, along with toffee, marzipan, apricots, and milk chocolate. This is a substantial and well integrated dram, with malt, almonds, cocoa, and spice on the palate, while the long, spicy finish offers more chocolate, soft fruits, and coffee.
      		
 
			
 
Canadian whisky makers tend to mash their grains separately, then blend them as mature spirits, allowing the individual grains to shine. This all-wheat whiskey was matured in used barrels, further accentuating these grain flavors. Sweet and light on the nose, the palate overflows with toffee and vanilla. Then, a vaguely earthy dryness follows glowing white pepper. Robust without the weight of corn, this luscious sipping whiskey provides guiltless pleasure with oodles of butterscotch custard, orange soda, and tingling spices.
      		
 
			
 
This is whisky made in a European style; don't expect scotch. Reset your taste buds, free your mind. This is 6 years old and spent five and a half of them in a beer barrel—the whisky is made from an award winning beer—and six months in a Merlot wine cask. It's fabulous. Honeycomb, creamy toffee caramel, European sappiness. It's slightly flabby, like an overfed but much-loved puppy. €35  
      		
 
			
 
This 100% rye whiskey was distilled at Fremont Mischief, and aged in oak. The flinty-minty rye spice blows right out at you, with a ripple of oaky vanilla. Beautiful youthful rye spirit, with crackling rye spiciness, sweet floral notes, and hints of horehound candy. The finish is a bit disappointing — fading somewhat quickly — but mainly because the rest of it's so good. Great price for mellowness in this category, too.
      		
 
			
 
With Small Batch, Wiser’s offers a taste of the quality of its more expensive Legacy to those with a limited whisky budget. This is big whisky at a very affordable price. Cinnamon, cloves, and candied ginger temper glowing hot pepper, while oak caramels and vanilla bolster sweet dark fruit. The earthiness of rye intersects with the fragrance of river plants and wet slate. Red cedar and fresh sawdust round out a clean, expressive palate. Lots of weight. C$33
      		
 
			
 
Skilled whisky makers know many different ways to achieve a particular flavor profile. So when someone mentions rye, don’t ask the percentage, ask how it was made. Why? Because sometimes Alberta Springs is made entirely from rye grain, and sometimes it isn’t. And not even trained tasters can tell. Crisp yet
silky with skillfully integrated rye spices riding waves of white pepper. Fruity, sweet vanilla, citrus zest, flaxseed, and dusty rye delivered in fresh-cut lumber
C$24
      		
 
			
 
Like the Writers Tears reviewed in this issue, this is from an independent company linked to renowned whiskey maker Bernard Walsh. It is described as of a style popular in James Joyce's Dublin (hence the name). Grain whiskey was a no-no at that time, so this uses no grain and is a mix of malt and pot still whiskeys. For its price and strength it is amazing — a big-hearted and full-flavored whiskey with an oily, apple-y pot still heart and cinnamon, nutmeg, and pepper spices. €38
      		
 
			
 
There’s little quality Port Dundas being bottled, so don’t pass up the opportunity for this one. It evokes aromas of grated milk chocolate, grilled pancakes, apricot, mango, and poached pear Jell-O, with spice notes of ground cumin, cinnamon, and nutmeg. This is simply delicious: a honey pot of sticky sweetness. A rich, cask strength grain whisky with notes of mandarin and candied jellies. A dash of water enables the sweet, creamy flavors to swirl around the mouth. £64
      		
 
			
 
Triple distilled. (Twice in Kentucky, once in Virginia.) Gritty and gripping on the palate, showing dry, vibrant oak spice (particularly warming cinnamon and mouth-coating vanilla), but with candied fruit, toffee, pot still rum, and caramel-coated nuts to keep it interesting. Polished leather and tobacco on the finish. (A Julio’s Liquors exclusive.)
-> On page 122 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
What a surprise this is! After a steady run of aged and just about agreeable dusty lemon and paprika malts, this is the youngest release—just 8 years old—from the now-demolished Wilson distillery. At a guess I'd say the original whisky was ordinary, so the Tasmanians who own the stock did what Tasmanians do and finished it in port casks to make it fruity. The blemishes aren't entirely ironed out but the whisky gets away with it—and this is rather good, and at a better strength. Why bottle premium malt at 40% and your 8 year old at 44%? NZ$79
      		
 
			
 
Yamazaki’s puncheons contain 480 liters and are made at the distillery’s cooperage from American white oak. The greater size means there are lower levels of oak extract, immediately apparent in the paler hue and more restrained aromas, where flowers mix with the gentle blandness of pear, lychee and, with water, pineapple. Best neat, here is distillery character (or one of the distillery characters, Yamazaki makes many styles) to the fore. Less immediate than the bourbon barrel, but ultimately more rewarding. £70
      		
 
			
 
The latest bottling of “Breath” is like a whisky smuggler’s tale. There’s the smell of old waxed walking boots, wet moss, damp earth, crushed bog foliage — heather, bog myrtle — burlap sacking, and a hastily smothered fire. The smoke is well controlled all the way, which helps to allow its scents to run over bitter coffee and a balancing central sweetness. Robust, hairy, and uncompromising, this is less of a breath and more of a roar. £65 
      		
 
			
 
After twelve years, it’s time for a revisit. No age statement; aged in a variety of woods. The whiskey is a pale gold and has a pleasantly sweet and layered nose; honeycomb, dried apricot, sugar cookies, and hints of an ice wine richness. It’s a bit hot for 43%, which robs the palate of some complexity, but that honeyed fruit and cookie is there in the mouth, too. Overall, quite nice indeed. 
      		
 
			
 
Until it arrived in U.S. stores earlier this year, Gibson’s 12 year old was highly prized by American cross-border whisky shoppers. They made it a duty free staple and no wonder. This is classic, old-style Canadian whisky. Seamlessly integrated spicy white pepper, refreshing bitterness, and succulent butterscotch, all burnished with clean oak, cinnamon, cloves, and simmering ginger. It has the creamy body of crème brûlée brightened by a sprinkling of blackstrap molasses. C$22
      		
 
			
 
This second, standard-strength version of Casey Overeem’s sherry pair bears toffee apple, cherry loaf, prune juice, and aged Aceto Balsamico Di Modena on the nose, adding a rewarding depth of flavor. It’s rich, full-bodied, and clings to the teeth like a mollusk to a rock during a storm over the South East Cape. A late-night dram of cherry flesh, Brazil nut, ground cinnamon, whole clove, and cacao that dissipates into a relaxing finish of well-worn leather and wax cherry lips. £140
      		
 
			
 
This promises to be a bumper year for older Irish whiskey. This example from Cooley distillery is a 1991 distillation matured in bourbon casks, then finished in a Sauternes cask.Temptations exude from the glass with apricot frangipane, whole almond, and cloved orange. After a vinous opening, it evolves through a complex palate of white chocolate, honey, cocktail grapefruit, and dried banana chips. Plum skin and cinnamon spice seem in conflict with the sweetness, and somewhat disturb the harmony. £130
      		
 
			
 
A new multi-vintage core expression of independent Irish single malt compiled from a vatting of whiskey finished variously in port, sherry, white burgundy, cabernet sauvignon, and Madeira. The nose suggests honey, baked lemons, ground almonds, desiccated coconut, white pepper, and soft toffee. A fabulously thick texture; thank goodness for their insistence on non-chill filtering. It’s fruity with twinkling spice, pepper, root ginger, and vanilla orbiting around a fudge-like core. The oak is present on the dry finish.
      		
 
			
 
Startlingly herbal. Penetrating, lifted, and aromatic with dill, mint, and in time, celery leaf and lovage. Smoke is akin to freshly-laid tarmac with some sweet seaweed behind. Lively and quite different to the official bottling. Water brings unripe pineapple, clove, sugared almond, and horseradish. This has typical Kilchoman sweet creaminess in the center. Water brings out flavors of nettles, and saltiness. £69
      		
 
			
 
The Wild Geese whiskeys offer much, but seem to lack the conviction to strike out and be bold. Ironically, though this is the one you'd expect to play safest of all, in fact, it's the most interesting of the bunch. There are trademark apple notes, but it flip-flops appealingly. It has a creamy and toffee-ish heart, is full, soft, and sweet, and has some orange fruit, apricot, and peach notes. Not unlike a classy Canadian whisky. 
-> On page 123 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Nobody hollers louder than an Aussie when he wants to. This malt is matured in 100-liter American oak casks and finished in port barrels, just as Cask M76 is (also reviewed this issue), but if M76 is about pub rock, this is Wolfmother, a hard-hitting, rich, forceful but complex wave of loveliness, with fig and date to the fore, baked peach, and crystallized brown sugar. It's creamy, rich, mouth coating, and there's some menthol cough drop in there for good measure. A$130
      		
 
			
 
Hankey Bannister includes some stunning aged whiskies in its range, but given the trend toward unaged scotch releases, I was a bit suspicious of this. It lacks depth but nevertheless is a butterfly in a breeze of a whisky; gossamer light, both tantalizing and elusive. It’s liquid honey, with sweet lime and pear, some cocoa, and to give it a modicum of depth, it’s underpinned
by a light saltiness.
      		
 
			
 
This one’s calling to me; I can smell the rich nose from a foot away. Freshly-sieved cornmeal, sharp oak aromas, and spice cake in the nose. Good body, a bit warm (expected from the proof), and a mouthful of
cracked corn, piecrust, sun-warmed meadow-mint, and vanilla. Finish is firm and leaner than the mouth, drawn out nicely. Belle Meade is currently sourced from MGP; Green Brier hopes to have their distillery up this year.
      		
 
			
 
Sweet, warm, grassy, like a sunny day on the prairie. The alcohol heat quickly yields to a grass/mint sweetness—this is high-rye stuff—that picks up some oily rye notes as it slides into a finish that is both bitter and sweet without being bittersweet; the components remain discrete, not blending. Quite nice, and reasonably priced. Sourced whiskey (with the 95% rye mashbill that’s an LDI/MGP signature).
      		
 
			
 
You don’t want to argue with this, sport, or it’ll deck you. Look at the strength, for a starter. But this is Australian whisky going off into a whole new direction, and not taking prisoners on the way. It’s
Lark whisky mixed with another Tasmanian one so you get the big clove and nutmeg, apple core, and fermenting fruit notes, but with honey and peat in the mix. Love it, loathe it, but you can’t ignore it. A$190
      		
 
			
 
Herbal-style Miyagikyo, with light balsa wood opening into macaroon and peach stone. The sense, especially with water, is of early autumn unfolding. The palate is very soft, with the assured boldness of character typical of the distillery, but tempered with a subtle undertow of persimmon and peach. Sweet and lush, but with delicacy. €169
      		
 
			
 
This is one of the first two releases from Copper House, a distillery contained within the Adnams brewery at Southwold on the east coast of England. If you know Adnams’ beers, it will come as no surprise that it's breaking new ground by creating a whisky with a mashbill of wheat, oats, and barley. This is only 3 years old but a soft toffee creaminess, chocolate orange, oak, and pepper ensure a delightful and surprisingly full whisky. £44
      		
 
			
 
From an undisclosed North Highland distillery, aged in a refill sherry hogshead. The impact of the sherry is clear, with ripe blackberry and peach. A floral, sweet, clover honey note rounds out a deliciously lush mouthfeel. This lushness is well balanced by a spicy mid-palate that features black pepper, ginger, and strong salinity that help provide some real depth. A long and slightly dry finish wraps up a solid whisky. (
)
      		
 
			
 
This cask strength, port cask-aged whisky comes from an undisclosed distillery near Aberlour. The impact of the port cask is unmistakable, with a nose that is deeply fruity with dried apricot, blackberry jam, honey, and malt. On the palate these rich sweet fruit notes are well balanced by black pepper, clove, salt, honey, and a touch of dark chocolate. The underlying proof also helps counterbalance the sweet fruit and drives a medium length and slightly dry finish. (
)
      		
 
			
 
Golden, lifted, and aromatic. The fleshy ripeness of the 13 year old is still there, but that little sulfur edge has now gone, revealing the ripe fruits massing underneath. Now you find pineapple and light chalk. The flowers have become daffodils and bluebells rather than lily, along with a soft, vanilla ice cream plumpness. Sweet and full, and just a shade lighter than the 13 year old. Muscly, but sweet; that’s the paradox of the Craigellachie character. £83
-> On page 124 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Gordon & MacPhail’s latest bottling from Macduff distillery is a year 2000 distillation, matured in refill sherry hogsheads. American cream soda and light spices on the nose, with honey, and white pepper development. Ultimately, rum and raisin fudge. Smooth and supple in the mouth, with apple peel, soft 
 sherry, and nutmeg. The finish is medium in length, with spicy fruit notes. £45
      		
 
			
 
This expression from Aberfeldy was distilled in April 1995 and bottled in January 2014 after maturation in refill, remade sherry hogsheads (casks #2,488, 2,489, and 2,491). The nose is floral, with ginger and developing milk chocolate. Progressively sweeter, with slight sherry and vanilla notes. The palate is silky and sweet, with banoffee pie, peaches, and spicy oak. The finish is long, with cocoa powder and more spiced oak. £60
      		
 
			
 
This unspecified single malt has been bottled non-chill filtered in single cask format. Maturation took place in a barrel that formerly contained Islay single malt. Initially earthy on the nose, with potato skins, salt, and white pepper. Time in the glass teases out fruity, caramel sweetness. The palate is very sweet and zesty, with orange sherbet, along with a nicely integrated maritime note which becomes more pronounced. The finish is spicy and mildly medicinal. £50
      		
 
			
 
I am hopeful this blended whisky has benefited from the alligator char treatment to contribute to the deep, rich color and charred smoke notes on the nose. A thick, velvety mouthfeel, with butter toffee, toasted marshmallows going gooey on a stick, great spices, vanilla, whole nutmeg, chicory, and the crust of a well-fired fruit loaf leaving some sooty cinders on the finish. A mighty fireside companion and my favorite Grand Macnish to date.
      		
 
			
 
Label: “BeanBall Bourbon – Tennessee Straight Bourbon Whiskey.” Believed to be from Dickel, but no confirmation; just the huge cracked corn component in the nose, which should be all you need. My, that’s tasty as it spreads like warm oil over the tongue, hot corn spirit spiked hard with oak. Good oak, dried corn, and a snap of mint in the finish. Nice selection…and interesting labeling in light of the recent Tennessee whiskey definition squabbles. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Made with green malt: not kilned, taken just as it’s ready from malting to be fermented and distilled, timing that accounts for some of the price and limited availability of this unique spirit. Smells like a shed full of drying herbs and flowers; vegetal souls transmigrated to the bottle. Herbal, European, restrained barrel character, headily vaporous in the mouth. An invigorating elixir I’d like to keep handy in a small flask; a little goes a long way. Fascinatingly different. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Coppersea uses New York grain (75% rye, 25% malt), mashed in wooden tanks and distilled in direct-fire copper pot stills. This unaged spirit is highly aromatic: hay, sunny meadow, hints of lavender and tansy, honeydew melon. Brilliantly herbal flavors, sweet grass, gobs of white pepper, lemon balm, and a long-lingering sweet heat. Almost more like an 
 than a whiskey, with layer upon layer to discover. Heretical thought: this might be wasted on a barrel.
      		
 
			
 
Brothers Claus and Michael Braunstein conceived the notion of making Danish whisky during fly-fishing trips to Scotland. Distilled on their combined column and pot still set, this peated whisky was disgorged from bourbon casks filled in 2007. Lime and Parma violets on the nose balance antiseptic and tea tree oil. Fizzy sherbet candy, lime, banana, and pineapple in the mouth, ending with a dry finish of Edinburgh rock. Fans of Islay’s south coast whiskies should try this one. 5,000kr
      		
 
			
 
Lord Elcho was an 18th century ancestor of William Wemyss, who fought on Bonnie Prince Charlie’s side at the Battle of Culloden in 1745. With a minimum of 40% malt, this fine blend has a rather perfumed nose of fresh mint, green apple, sliced melon, and tropical fruits. The soft candy sugar and butterscotch palate builds, with layers of malt, cherry laces, gingerbread, and pfeffernüsse leading to a ginger and spice finish of significant length. Highly accomplished. £26
      		
 
			
 
A limited edition blend with more than 75 percent malt content, containing grains from 1978 and 1979, and malts from 1982. A genteel nose exudes white chocolate, vanilla slice, butterscotch, fresh apricots, and salted pecans. Commanding and rich, it luxuriates in bitter orange, ripe apricots, marmalade, dairy toffees, cinnamon, and raspberry, with a finish of Seville orange rind. It’s a little blander with water, toward baked lemons and barley sugar, so resist and take it as it comes. £190
-> On page 125 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This was inspired by Stewart Laing’s childhood journeys by steam locomotive from Glasgow to Speyside with his father. Hunter Laing’s blended malt includes contributions from Blair Athol, Teaninich, and Clynelish and raises toffee sauce, dried banana chips, and spring foliage, with a fringe of fresh mint. You can appreciate the cool, clean taste; ripe banana and chocolate-dipped fudge blooming into late notes of mocha, ginger, and chocolate mousse. Dry finish of ginger cookies and espresso. All aboard! £40
      		
 
			
 
A confectioner’s delight; Fry’s Five Centres, lime, lemon, kumquat, iced buns, fresh mint, and crushed cardamom that matches the chocolate aromas. Those re-charred, rejuvenated casks are very much in evidence here. It has a gilded, satiny sheen, glistening with lemon drizzle cake, butterscotch, orange matchsticks, and banana bread. Incontrovertibly, it inhabits a signature grain style, but it fizzles out with a sticky, sweet aftertaste, like licking the spoon from the icing bowl. £45
      		
 
			
 
Appearances can be deceptive, as this pallid specimen proves. Overripe honeydew melons, lemon cheesecake sprinkled with zest, vanilla pear muffins
cooked apple, spring blossoms, and icing sugar. The sweet, sugary opener is burnt out enjoyably by blistering burnt orange, butterscotch, and lemon bonbons. While the flavor intensity builds commendably, it doesn’t escape without a touch of astringency. Water makes this sing ‘Oranges and Lemons,’ but go easy with it. The finish is like a greedy mouthful of 
. £80
      		
 
			
 
“Local heirloom rye grains” are distilled (less than half a mile from the Monongahela River) in a copper alembic, aged 14 months, bottled at cask strength. Has a beautiful ruddy glow. Clean, focused nose of fresh rye grain, spicy-sweet with a nip of bitter oil in the back. Not a barn-burner, even at 56%, but brimful with rye spice, rye oiliness, and rye mint, and not over-oaked, either, as the finish closes evenly. A bit direct, but very nicely done!
      		
 
			
 
Straw gold color. Very clean aroma and flavor-malty, with vanilla, cotton candy, honey and subtle floral notes. Light in body and somewhat creamy in texture, with a soft, slightly youthful finish.

   Style: Single malt Irish whiskey. Price: mid $30s. Available nationwide.

   More Irish character than previous Knappogue bottlings, and quite mature for an eight year old whiskey. It is a touch youthful on the finish. While it is quite enjoyable now (and unbelievably drinkable), I would like to have seen this whiskey with another one to two years of aging to give it a little more depth and maturity on the finish.
      		
 
			
 
The newest vintage from Knappogue Castle and, like the past two vintages, this one is from Bushmills. More maturity and oak influence when compared to the 1994. Floral, with creamy vanilla, toasted oak, honeyed malt, citrus fruit, and marshmallow. Soft, creamy finish with delicate oak spice. A clean, very drinkable whiskey, and my favorite of the post-Cooley Knappogues.

      		
 
			
 
Close to one year later than the previous Knappogue Castle release, a 15 year old expression, and distinctly different in flavor profile. (Think different distilleries.) This one, triple-distilled, suggests Bushmills origin. Very clean and polished. Gently sweet, too, with powdered vanilla, honeyed malt, complex tropical fruit (tangerine, kiwi, coconut, pineapple), and creamy marshmallow. Clean, gently sweet finish. Not the most complex Irish I’ve ever tasted, but the flavors that are there are tight and well-balanced.
      		
 
			
 
Lovely balance on the nose and palate. Soft and gently textured, too. The sweetness of the whisky (honey, fruit gum drops, and malty vanilla), dovetail nicely with light, bright citrus and teasing dried spices. Heather/floral notes enhance the whisky’s complexity. Clean, delicately polished oak finish. A very versatile, inexpensive, easy-drinking whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Insistent honey nose, with whisky underneath; the honey is very forward, but still floral and light, fresh. Flavor is pleasant: floral, faintly herbal, and more honey, but again, light and fresh, not cloying, not heavy. There’s a hint of citrus in the finish, and then, finally, there is a slightly sticky character. Not something a single malt drinker would likely reach for, but a respectable entry in the field of flavored whisky.
      		
 
			
 
Drier on the palate than the 90, with more caramel than honey, and more oak spice (especially vanilla) and grip on the finish. Still, rather light in personality. However, I’m looking for more sweet notes to partner with the dried spice. Price is per 375 ml.
-> On page 126 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
More mature and with more depth than the US-1 expression reviewed below. Lush, sweet notes of caramel and toffee up front are followed on the palate by light fruit, dried spices (cinnamon, evergreen, and a hint of ginger), finishing long and dry with more spice, leather, and suggestions of tobacco. 

      		
 
			
 
A light color suggests a relaxed contact between cask and whisky, but what this lacks in terms of ‘woodiness‘ it makes up for in all-round deliciousness. Aberlour is often masked with plenty of sherry and/or bourbon oak; here the distillery character is thrust to the fore and comes out as being highly aromatic. There are candies, bubblegum, kiwi fruits, and cut flowers. The palate is vibrant with a touch of parma violet and pear juice. Altogether a little charmer.
      		
 
			
 
This expression of Aberfeldy fits between the core 12 and 21 year old bottlings, but is exclusively available in Travel Retail outlets. The nose opens with a slightly savory note, rich and spicy, with sherry, Jaffa oranges, and sweet oak. The palate is smooth and rounded, with malt, nutty spice, honey, and milky coffee. The finish is lengthy, with Seville oranges, plain chocolate, dark sherry notes, and licorice. (
Price is per liter.
      		
 
			
 
Fresh and clean, with notes of vanilla, ripe barley, honey, caramel apple, and toasted coconut. Creamy and mouth-coating in texture, leading to a pleasingly dry, spicy oak finish. Very drinkable, yet satisfying. Quite nice. 

      		
 
			
 
Stylish, sophisticated. Fresh, honeyed floral, green grapes, kiwi, plum, and currant jelly. Hint of cinnamon and nutmeg. Soft, gently sweet finish. Pleasing sweetness to go with the fruit.
      		
 
			
 
This expression from the Isle of Arran distillery appeared in 2010 and one-third of the component whiskies were matured in European oak casks while two-thirds came from American oak. Very fragrant and perfumed on the nose, with peaches, brandy, and ginger snaps, plus vanilla and mild oak. Smooth and creamy on the palate, with spicy summer fruits, apricots, and hazelnuts. The lingering finish is spicy, biscuity, and slowly drying, with just a hint of salt.
      		
 
			
 
This single sherry cask bottling from Arran was distilled on February 17
, 1997, being bottled on February 5
, 2014. The nose opens with a hint of malt vinegar, followed by sherry and sultanas. More floral with time. Full-bodied, with spicy sherry, figs, and raisins. Long and spicy in the finish, with fruity sherry to the end. 
      		
 
			
 
It always amazes me how well this triple-distilled Lowland whisky ages. The best ones are in their twenties and thirties. This one, at 40, is still holding up quite well, all things considered. Lively, fragrant aroma for such an old whisky. Notes of vanilla, coconut cream pie, butterscotch, hay, wood shavings, sultana, dried citrus, and a potpourri of spice. Some “old oak” notes emerging from time to time throughout, with a gently spicy finish. An expensive whisky, but those who pony up the money will enjoy it. 

      		
 
			
 
When compared to its younger siblings, this whisky is deeper in flavor. The citrus becomes more dominant (glazed orange, tangerine marmalade), with added notes of caramelized nuts and maple syrup. A good dash of dried spices kicks in and the whisky becomes firm and dry on the finish. My favorite of the standard range is still the 21 year old expression, which has been around for quite some time.
      		
 
			
 
Auchentoshan has launched a range of travel retail-exclusive bottlings with names relating to oak, including Heartwood, which is matured in a mix of deeply-charred former bourbon and toasted oloroso sherry casks.  Soft, medium sherry notes on the nose; stem ginger, cinnamon, parma violets, and clove-studded oranges. The palate features wood polish, old leather, plain chocolate, cloves, and ginger. Dates and spicy orange marmalade on the lengthy finish. €50
-> On page 127 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
This expression of Auchentoshan from Douglas Laing’s Provenance range was distilled in September 2000, matured in bourbon casks, and bottled in November 2012. Opens very sweet on the nose, with vanilla, peaches, and apricots, plus allspice. More caramel in time. Medium bodied, with sweet fruits, new-mown hay, and hard toffee on the palate, giving way to spice and aniseed. The spicy finish features cloves, and dries steadily, with a final flourish of pepper. £40
      		
 
			
 
The latest single cask expression of Auchentoshan from Wemyss Malts is 14 years old and was matured in a bourbon barrel. The outturn is 342 bottles. The nose is fleetingly herbal; then offers crème de citron, turning to tinned peaches in syrup, and finally pine and peppery caramel. Silky-smooth in the mouth, spicy, with lemon and digestive biscuits. Freshly-squeezed lemon lingers in the chili and chocolaty finish. £78
      		
 
			
 
Wemyss Malts has bottled several single cask Auchentoshans in the past, and this 15 year old release is of 342 bottles, provided by a bourbon barrel. Peaches, caramel, sea salt, and developing lemonade on the nose. Sweet and fruity on the palate, with more peaches and very soft background spices. The finish dries slowly, with ginger and a hint of aniseed. £75
      		
 
			
 
This cask strength Northern Highlander offers a full and complex nose, comprising brandy notes, stewed apricots, spices, table salt, and white pepper. A hint of nougat turns to darker caramel. Rich on the palate, mouth-coating, sweet, with lively spices. The finish is buttery, with a pinch of ginger, and a final brandy-and-soda finish. 
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in October 1991, this 20 year old Private Collection expression of Balblair spent 40 months of secondary maturation in casks sourced from Crozes-Hermitage, the largest AOC in the northern Rhône wine-producing region of France. The nose offers red currants, sultanas, vanilla, and white pepper. The palate is initially soft and sweet, with summer fruits, but gradually darkens and dries. The finish features dark chocolate and raisins. 2,000 bottles. 
      		
 
			
 
Gold color (as its name suggests) with a hint of copper. This whisky, which was finished in Caribbean rum casks, follows on the heels of the limited edition The Balvenie 17 year old Rum Cask. The 17 year old was pleasant enough, but quite sweet (I rated it an 80). This new Golden Cask is an improvement, because the higher alcohol level, along with an array of dried spice, helps to balance the sweet rum notes. Lively, bright tangerine, nectarine, and pineapple combine with Balvenie’s signature honey, nougat, Heath bar, light molasses, and milk chocolate. Dried spice (vanilla, cinnamon, nutmeg) and gritty oak resin kick in on the finish, rounding everything out quite nicely. Now if we could only have the best of both worlds -- the balance of the Golden Cask 14 year old, and the maturity of the 17 year old. That could be a whisky worthy of a 90s rating. (Exclusive to Travel Retail.) Price per Litre.
      		
 
			
 
A limited edition bottling to commemorate the great David Stewart’s 50th year in the business and, as befits this quiet man, here’s a release that rewards just sitting and listening. This gives more of a nod to Cognac than Speyside; something to do with the dried apricot, orange blossom, and golden syrup. The palate is gentle and layered, with more dried fruits, which are balanced by an almost jammy finish where, finally, some cereal is glimpsed.
      		
 
			
 
Antique gold. Aromas of toffee, malty sweetness, fresh mint and subtle oak. Mouth coating, creamy texture-almost chewy-with flavors of toffee, almonds, dark chocolate, and subtle wood spices on the finish. 

  Style: Highland single malt Scotch whisky. Price: high $30s. Limited availability nationwide.

  This is a very pleasing, straightforward whisky that is quite mature for its age.
      		
 
			
 
Finished in a tawny port cask. Peat smoke and seaweed interwoven with layers of ripe, red fruit (currant, raspberry, cherry), crisp citrus, graham cracker, vanilla, and honey. Nice interplay between sweetness, fruit, and smoke. (Brighter and more dimensional than the other two reviewed here.) 

      		
 
			
 
Benriach is a lesser-known whisky and, for a Speysider, fairly light in style. This one is very bright and fruity on the nose with aromas of citrus (lemon), pineapple, green grapes, vanilla bean, honey, and linseed oil. Its age is evident, but tucked away in the background. The palate mirrors the aromas and is quite complex. As you might expect for a 34 year old whisky, it dries out mid-palate with some grassy hay notes yielding to resinous oak towards the finish, but the oak never becomes excessive. I can’t remember the last time I tasted a Benriach this good. 

-> On page 128 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
A peated version of Benriach that was also finished in a port pipe. There is a really nice blend of flavors here; a sweet malty foundation layered with ripe red fruit notes (raspberry, strawberry preserve, currant) and a firm blanket of smoke that goes on and on. All the flavors are bold, but they're equally balanced. Not a subtle whisky but quite entertaining. (A Binny's Beverage Depot exclusive.)
      		
 
			
 
This is a new bottler to me and they’ve made quite an arrival with this, a classic Benrinnes. This is a distillery where meatiness is desirable, and this is as thick and savory as a slow-cooked pheasant stew or cassoulet, with an added herbal and pruney element. A real sweetness and a pleasing lift of sulfur (which can enhance whiskies) add to the complexity. Chewy on the tongue, with earthiness revealed by water. £65  
      		
 
			
 
This most recent Connoisseurs’ Choice bottling from Scotland’s southernmost distillery has been matured in refill sherry hogsheads. The nose is pleasing and light, mildly herbal, with cut grass, citrus fruits, and a hint of malt. Medium-bodied, sweet and fruity in the mouth, with peaches, nuts, and discreet spice. Relatively lengthy in the creamy finish. Very drinkable and quite substantial.
      		
 
			
 
One of the first releases from the recently formed Hunter Laing & Co, established in Glasgow by Stewart Laing, is this 20 year
old expression of Bladnoch. It was distilled in November 1992 and matured in a refill sherry cask. Lemon cake, honey, and ginger nuts on the pleasing nose; fruity and spicy on the palate, with a savory flourish, and a honey and malt backdrop. Spicy caramel and mocha coffee in the finish. £75
      		
 
			
 
This single cask bottling was distilled in February 1993 and matured for 20 years in a sherry butt. Rich and spicy on the nose: peel, dates, and sultanas. More floral in time. A silky mouthfeel, major spice notes, ginger, and sweet sherry. Long in the finish, with nutmeg and plain chocolate cherry liqueur.£80
      		
 
			
 
Tempest to the world, Dorus Mor in the U.S., this has an intensely salty start that’s
like being slapped by a wave on Bowmore’s harbor wall. That marine note
continues: samphire, clams with a squeeze of lemon. Water brings out wet clay.
The palate is equally briny, but with a sprig of lavender, then soft fruits
wreathed in peat smoke. It’s tense and coiled, with real energy when neat, but
it’s best like that, so deal with the heat.
      		
 
			
 
The ruby color gives the port maturation away, as does the nose: all plum crumble, stewed rhubarb, and caramelized orchard fruits. It’s more autumnal than jammy with hints of dusty angelica and only vestigial smoke. The palate is hot, with those hedgerow fruits and a light touch of perfumed lavender before a flock of tarry smoke appears on the finish. All well-integrated and at its best with a little water.
      		
 
			
 
Less appetizing brine and zing, and showing more “weight” when compared to its sibling. Sweeter notes of toffee, fig, and vanilla fudge lay the foundation for mixed nuts, black raspberry, plum, nectarine, and ripe red grape. A soothing dram. 

      		
 
			
 
A distinctive (and intriguing) Bruichladdich, with honeyed malt, vanilla pod, charcoal, exotic fruit, and dark chocolate bourbon balls, teased with suggestions of fennel and espresso bean. Tactile, leather finish. (A D&M Wines & Liquors exclusive.)
      		
 
			
 
This has good breadth and hints of honey-nut cornflakes on the nose, with the distillery’s sweet, lemon-fresh/floral core still evident, but skewed more toward roasted notes, like toasted rice and sun-dried grasses; even a hint of the felt-festooned interior of a woolen mill. Water brings out meadowsweet. Raspberries lead on the palate, contrasting with the crisp, nutty chaff notes. It’s citric and gingery on the finish, but has drive and energy. £42
-> On page 129 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
The nose is slightly closed, all very delicate, with some hay-like aromas akin to harvest time. This gentleness allows sweet melon-like fruits to come through, alongside patisserie, icing, gentle vanilla, and an effect like Hedione, the ‘smell’ of sunshine. Rounded and very sweet, typical of the distillery, with a lightly drying effect similar to powdered icing sugar. It slightly loses it with water, so keep neat. A pleasant, straight down the middle Laddie. £60/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in 2009, so remember this is only 5 years old. At this stage there’s not a lot of cask, but there is an insanely intense smoky, herbal note like eucalyptus, celery, spruce, pine resin, then some angelica and a crisp mineral edge. The palate is balanced between this intensity, big smoke, and Bruichladdich’s typical oily, sweet core. Water doesn’t affect it one little bit. It is bold, it is proud, it is in charge. I like its sheer ballsiness. £110
      		
 
			
 
Matured in cognac before being finished in Sauternes; here we have a clean, sweet, and well-rounded Bunna’, with hickory-like smoke, bonfire, and ginger biscuits. Lightly vegetal notes with farmyard elements among the smoke and thick, citric sweetness. Immediate smoke on top of this mix of spice, Seville orange, apricot, cheesecake base, hazelnut, red fruits, and preserved ginger in syrup adding an almost peppery finish. Lovely. £250
      		
 
			
 
This is Caol Ila not only in unpeated guise, but from a ‘bodega-treated’ sherry butt. Full and lush, the distillery’s pear and melon here are in super-ripe guise alongside sweet biscuits, mashed banana, and Mars bar. With water, it’s more a cabinetmaker’s workshop—but isn’t woody. The mouth is sweet and concentrated with jabs of raspberry and hedgerow fruits. Who needs peat? My best value bottling this issue.  
      		
 
			
 
When this first appeared I found it too sweet, which was strange, as the finishing period is in dry oloroso casks. This most recent iteration sees the finish better integrated. There’s more spiciness than on the standard 14 year old, while the fruit seems plumper: more apricot and kumquat. The waxiness is there but the candle is scented. It still clings to the tongue, but there is an added nutty, oxidized character. A marked improvement.£47
      		
 
			
 
Duncan Taylor’s latest cask strength, single cask release from the Sutherland distillery of Clynelish is 21 years old. It is sweet on the nose, with hand-rolling tobacco, milk chocolate, overripe grapes, and vanilla. Becoming saltier and drier. Nutty and mildly maritime on the palate, with lots of spice, steadily drying. Spice and ginger in the lengthy, oily finish. £80
      		
 
			
 
The latest Wemyss Malts single cask offering from Clynelish distillery is a 16 year old expression, matured in a hogshead which gave an out-turn of 339 bottles. The nose offers sea salt and lemon, with emerging green apples and vanilla. Apple tart with custard and a dusting of cinnamon on the palate. The finish is long and peppery, with a hint of freshly-ground coffee beans. £75
      		
 
			
 
With the percentage of former oloroso sherry-matured spirit ramped up to 60 percent in this Dee variant, the nose is deeper and richer than that of the Tweed Dram; Seville orange marmalade and a hint of cocoa. More immediate dark chocolate on the palate, with raisins and walnuts. The finish is lengthy, with plums, black coffee, and a suggestion of licorice. £42 Currently not available in the U.S. 
      		
 
			
 
Comprising 80 percent American white oak-matured whisky and 20 percent from ex-oloroso sherry casks, the Tweed Dram offers lots of citrus fruit on the nose, with an early dusting of icing sugar, then orange and lemon wine gums. Relatively light and fresh, with gentle fudge notes. Malt, toffee, cinnamon, and over-ripe oranges on the spicy palate. Quite long in the finish, with spicy oak, nutmeg, and lingering dark chocolate notes. £42 Currently not available in the U.S. 
      		
 
			
 
The most youthful bottling in the Constellation series is a 19 year old, which started life in a first-fill bourbon barrel before being transferred into a European oak port pipe in 2002 for a further nine years of maturation. The nose offers a hint of new leather, marzipan, developing caramel, and damsons. Zesty fruit, allspice, and ground ginger on the palate, along with thick-cut orange marmalade. The finish is long, warming, and spicy. Cask number 18; 737 bottles. 
-> On page 130 of 235...        0.0%
      		
 
			
 
Along with Cragganmore, this is one of the underrated members of the original Classic Six. Quite why has always slightly baffled me. OK, it isn’t smoky, but the nose has a deep, soft, honeyed sweetness: think caramelized fruits, hints of thick cream, and a light touch of fennel and sharp citrus. Thick in the center and very gentle, it’s that chunkiness in the middle that is the secret to its beauty.
      		
 
			
 
There have been three previous Special Release offerings of Dalwhinnie, and this 1987 distillation is the first to have been aged in rejuvenated American oak hogsheads. Cloves are to the fore on the aromatic nose, along with cinnamon, ginger, fudge, and tropical fruits. Initially oily and honeyed on the palate, with developing spice, wood resin, and herbal flavors. Spicy oak in the lengthy finish, with a return to the initial note of cloves. 5,358 bottles.
      		
 
			
 
A mélange of sugared almonds, toffee, sultana, and citrus peel. Firm on the palate, with a nutty, spicy oak finish. Nicely done. (Exclusive to Binny’s Beverage Depot.) 

      		
 
			
 
The fifth peated release of Edradour. This one is aged in Marsala casks. Sweet, with clinging fruit and thumping raw smoke. Youthful, embracing, and fleshy in the middle, with ash, anise, and espresso that grow toward the finish. These Ballechin releases keep getting better. Reminds me of a young Islay whisky without the brine and seaweed. 
      		
 
			
 
Lemons, salt, and then malt on the nose. The palate is initially smooth, then fizzy fruits come through, with a hint of vanilla and slight brininess. The finish is well-mannered, with spicy soft fruits.
      		
 
			
 
Clearly sharing the same DNA as the 10 year old expression, this variant has less overt pear drops on the nose, which is altogether more floral and complex, with ripe oranges, pineapple, and an herbal note. Elegant on the palate, with orange, vanilla; and contrasting dark berries, black pepper, and oak. The finish is lengthy and slightly oily. £57
      		
 
			
 
Nicely sherried. Rich, with maple syrup, honey-drenched citrus, sultana, and a good dried oak spice finish for balance. Well done for a 12 year old, and definite competition for Macallan of the same age. 
      		
 
			
 
The variety between this series of single casks is quite extraordinary. This has a soft and light nose with some mint and liqueured fruit, and a big, rich, and impressive taste with anise and menthol, glacé cherries, and traces of mint. The finish is warming and full, with the mint and cherry theme carrying through to a slightly peppery conclusion. £71 
      		
 
			
 
Most Scotch whiskies are aged in used casks. New oak casks are much more expensive and can add too much wood to the whisky’s flavor profile. But, if used sparingly as a “finish” — as in this whisky — it can add an interesting new dimension. Honeyed vanilla, toasted malt, ripe nectarine, and an array of tropical fruit (pineapple, coconut, tangerine), wrapped up by a resinous grip on the finish (displaying the virgin oak influence). Very enjoyable and distinctive.
      		
 
			
 
I always think that having “dull” in the middle of its name doesn’t do this distillery any favors. This is anything but; instead this is a fresh and vibrant example that brings on a Whitmanesque reverie of chewing on leaves of grass: sappy, fresh chlorophyll, coumarin, lime. These scented grasses—now vetiver—remain in charge on the tongue. A rolling prairie in the mouth, and best neat.
-> On page 131 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
A sherry butt this time, which has allowed the whisky a little more space to breathe. Although as concentrated as you'd expect here, we can see more fragrance emerging and a big-boned elegance is on show — think Margaret Dumont. I pick up some rose hip syrup, dried apple, Armagnac/prune, and a licorice note, as seen on the ’62; while on the palate, a good balance of rich chocolatey sweetness to offset the tannins. Big but balanced. £512
      		
 
			
 
The color is light gold, the nose is very sweet and delicate, with a floral aspect that’s not always immediately apparent in Glenfarclas. This is from a fourth-fill hogshead, which provides creaminess, toffee, a little hint of orchid, burnt cream, and grilled peach. Sweetly delicious. The palate is akin to bread-and-butter pudding, with that creaminess continuing. All very summery and ‘up.’ Quite different, but appealing. £350
      		
 
			
 
Delicate, with some jasmine, lily of the valley, and even, with time, the rich aldehydes of Chanel No.5. This heaviness gives a butterscotch-like quality when water’s added, alongside apple. The palate is thicker than the light color suggests—it’s from a fourth-fill hogshead—with overripe pear and white chocolate; with water, becomes scented with an added touch of marzipan and chestnut puree. One for a thoughtful afternoon’s contemplation. £760
      		
 
			
 
The world’s best-selling single malt. Isn’t that sufficient to give this dram some respect? It might be me, but it strikes me that ’Fiddich has more heft to it these days, with a sherried element giving the pear, apple, and light cereal of the distillery character a sweet, plump, sultana underpinning. This then adds chewiness to the palate, balancing the dry nuttiness and receding on the finish where those green fruits come through to add fresh acidity. Great balance. 
      		
 
			
 
Here, a new solera vat is home to a Glenfiddich that has been exclusively aged in sherry casks, and shows its origins with deep, black fruitiness, orange peel, and sultana. The signature pears of ’Fiddich
here are dried and sit next to moist fruitcake. Ripe and long, with toffee, a pleasant wisp of sulfur, and blackberry. An easy-going sherried style that’s ideal for the beginner. 
£49/1 liter
      		
 
			
 
Another from Glenfiddich’s three new solera vats, here we can see the distillery’s light character turned up to the max thanks to a mix of American oak, red wine casks, and a smidgen of sherry. Think of hyacinth, ultra-fresh William pear, light barley, and grass. Zesty, clean and light, and ridiculously drinkable with a silky feel in the middle of the tongue. Quite a bargain. 
£39/1 liter
      		
 
			
 
Pale straw in color, and while it is clean and fresh, it’s also very delicate, with elderflower blossom, dusty florals, and a freshly-starched linen note. All rather discreet, shy even, but effort reveals a subtly lovely dram. Water adds a perfumed, green note. As the nose suggests, it’s not an immediate thruster of a malt, with some light jasmine tea and a little fleshy fruit on the end. Tread cautiously, lest you scare it.
      		
 
			
 
Melon notes to the fore early on the nose; floral, especially carnations. Progressively more caramel, with Parma violet sweets. Pretty and feminine. Richer and fuller-bodied on the palate than the nose might suggest. Fresh fruit, apple juice, almonds, and gentle spices, slowly moving to milky coffee in the finish. The faintest hint of smoke pervades the flavor, but is very much a ‘bit part’ player in the ensemble. 
      		
 
			
 
This is the first expression from Glen Garioch to have been fully matured in wine casks, specifically 
 barriques from Saint-Julien in Bordeaux. The whisky was distilled on June 23
, 1998, and spent over 15 years in the Bordeaux wood. Milk chocolate-coated caramels, crystallized ginger, and cranberries on the nose. Autumn berries on the early palate, turning to cough syrup, with rich malt and lively chocolate spiciness. Caramel merges with white pepper in the relatively long finish.
      		
 
			
 
The ruby/antique amber color suggests a first-fill sherry cask; the nose and palate confirm it. This whisky is a mouthful: fruitcake, roasted chestnuts, burnt raisin, candied orange, molasses, leather, tobacco, dark chocolate, wax, and a hint of clove. An incredible amount of sherry, but it’s not cloying. The flavors are clean, complex, and well-balanced.

-> On page 132 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
An intriguing whisky. Blueberry cobbler, crushed grape, maple syrup, nougat, and spice (cinnamon, nutmeg). The oak is polished and unimposing. Liqueur-ish. A nice contrast to its younger sibling, and it’s more polarizing because of its distinctiveness. 
      		
 
			
 
Glenglassaugh distillery has released a number of country-exclusive expressions recently, including this 37 year old single cask (470 bottles) for North America, under the Master Distillers Selection banner. Initially, cornflakes and sherry on the nose, with developing vanilla and soft toffee. Becoming very sweet. Rich and notably spicy on the palate, with dates and dark chocolate. Persistently spicy in the finish, with background citrus fruits.
      		
 
			
 
A new, cask-strength Glengoyne without chill-filtering. Both features put this whisky in a higher class than the entry level 10 year old. That classic clean maltiness which Glengoyne is known for is certainly in this whisky. With the addition of some water, the whisky really opens up, becoming fragrant, fruity (cherry pits, apples), along with hints of anise and almonds. A nice effort from the new owners. 

      		
 
			
 
Distiller’s Gold is exclusive to Travel Retail outlets and is dedicated to the distillery’s first manager, Cochran Cartwright, whose ghost is said to haunt the Stirlingshire distillery. Distiller’s Gold displays a nose of brittle nut toffee and dried fruit, with vanilla and caramel notes emerging. Spicy tropical fruits on the palate, with an edge of cinnamon and ginger. Medium in length, pleasantly oaky, persistently nutty and spicy. Price is per liter.
      		
 
			
 
Glengoyne’s core range has been revamped: the 12 year old cask strength bottling was replaced by one with no age statement, and this 15 year old was added. Maturation has taken place in sherry casks and the result is a nose of vanilla, ginger, toffee, vintage cars’ leather seats, and sweet fruit notes. The somewhat oily palate features quite lively spices, raisins, hazelnuts, and oak. The finish is medium in length and spicy to the end, with cocoa powder. £48
      		
 
			
 
Amber gold color. Rather sweet aroma and flavors of caramel, light toffee, almonds, and vanilla. A background note of fruit (lemon? ripe cherries?) contributes to its complexity. Its body is somewhat rich and chewy. A dryness on the finish keeps the sweetness of the whisky in check. 

      		
 
			
 
Well-rounded and pleasingly sweet, with ripe red strawberries, raspberry, tropical fruit, graham cracker, white chocolate, and anise, all on a bed of toffee. Some charred oak on the finish. This whisky has a gentle, soothing persona which I think most people will enjoy (me included). 

      		
 
			
 
Well-rounded and pleasingly sweet, with ripe strawberry, raspberry, tropical fruit, graham cracker, white chocolate, and anise, all on a bed of toffee.  Some charred oak on the finish.  This whisky has a gentle, soothing persona which I think most people will enjoy (me included).

      		
 
			
 
Antique gold color. Rich, thick malty aroma with interwoven notes of fruit, anise, and polished oak. Medium to full in body and rich in texture and flavor, with chewy toffee, roasted nuts, vanilla fudge, and candied fruit. Soothing finish, with a gentle sweetness balanced by a soft, leathery dryness. 

      		
 
			
 
This hails from the first of Rothes’ stock that was specifically laid down for the vintage release program. The nose shows typical Rothes softness — woolen blankets and malted milk. As it opens. there’s wet linen, caramel fudge, and a hint of mixed berry and dark fruits slowly collapsing into jam. A touch of sherried nuttiness on the palate is followed by thick clover honey and a little crisp malt. The finish is gentle, lightly spiced with a touch of struck match sulfur. 
-> On page 133 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Last year, four whisky editors were invited by Glenrothes’ heritage director Ronnie Cox to choose a single cask bottling. Being opinionated hacks, they couldn’t agree and so two casks were chosen! This, the oldest, from a refill butt, is for the European markets, and shows hints of rancio: truffle, leaf mold, boot polish, and star anise. The impression is of faded elegance with tannins, fruit, and spice in harmony, and a hint of pomegranate-like bitterness just on the end. £600
      		
 
			
 
A very immediate, expressive, sweet start, with manuka honey dribbling on top of baked fruits, sweet citrus, and a dollop of clotted cream on the side. All very luscious and calorific. As if this dessert theme wasn’t sufficient, the palate lays it on even more thickly, with apricot now joining the mass of fruits. The light grip adds very necessary structure and stops things getting floppy. One for those with a sweet tooth. Recommended.(
)
      		
 
			
 
Recently added to Chivas Brothers’ lineup of Cask Strength Edition whiskies, this Eastern Highland single malt from the ‘lost’ distillery of Glenugie in the fishing port of Peterhead is perfumed on the nose, with discreet sherry, cocoa, fresh leather, blackcurrants, peaches, and apricots. The palate is initially sweet, with fresh fruit, but old-fashioned cough drops and black coffee notes soon arrive. Very long in the spicy, tannic oak finish. Exclusive to Chivas Brothers’ distillery visitor centers and www.maltwhiskydistilleries.com (500 bottles). £250 
      		
 
			
 
Elgin distiller, bottler, and whisky merchant Gordon & MacPhail has revamped its prestigious Rare Old range of veteran single malts, many from lost distilleries, and this bottling from Glenugie in Peterhead is one of the latest releases in the lineup. Sweet on the nose, with marshmallows, wax polish, creamy caramel, and milk chocolate. Quite full-bodied, with white pepper, ginger, muted citrus fruit, and cocoa. Soon starts to dry…drying steadily through the nutty finish, with musty oak and aniseed. £430
      		
 
			
 
Dark and complex. Sweet notes of toffee and caramel are spiced with notes of cinnamon and cocoa. Background notes of smoldering peat, oak resin, and clove add intrigue and balance the sweetness. Long, resinous, dried spice finish. (Bottled for Sam’s Wines and Spirits) 

      		
 
			
 
A lush Highland Park, aged in a sherry cask. Ripe fruit (sultana, apricot, dark cherry pits), layers of sweetness (toffee, nougat, molasses) almonds, and juicy oak. Hints of vanilla cream, honey, heather and polished leather add dimension. This sherry contribution is clean, not overly sappy or waxy like others I have tasted. (Bottled exclusively for Binny's Beverage Depot.)
      		
 
			
 
Harald Fairhair was King of Norway and a major figure in Viking history. This Warrior variant takes us closer to Highland Park’s traditional DNA, with the nose offering potato peels on a barbecue; earthy and herbal, with developing notes of heather in bloom and even violets. Lively fresh fruits, newly-baked cake, nutmeg, and ginger figure on the palate. The spicy finish is relatively long, with candied citrus peel and licorice. €75/700 ml
      		
 
			
 
The fifth batch of Adelphi’s Fascadale single malt comprises a marriage of two Spanish oak casks and three American oak casks of Highland Park. The outturn is 1,483 bottles. Icing sugar, vanilla, milk chocolate, apricots, plus mildly smoky malt on the nose. Full-bodied and fruity on the palate, with toffee, black pepper, and a hint of peat in the background. The medium-length finish is slowly drying. £45
      		
 
			
 
Heather honey, malt, newly-cut hay, pineapple, and very slight smoke on the nose. Leather, malt, cinnamon, a touch of oak and soft smokiness on the palate. Medium in length, with a hint of honey behind the oak, spice, and smoke. (
 €150
      		
 
			
 
Freya is the third release in Highland Park’s Valhalla Collection; unusually, it has been matured in first-fill bourbon casks. It fits into the core range between the 12 and 18 year olds. The nose is sweet, floral, and heathery, with pineapple, mango, and a background earthiness. Finally, vanilla and milk chocolate. Smooth on the palate, with passion fruit, and more overt peatiness than is apparent on the nose. Subtle peat, char, and a hint of licorice in the finish.
-> On page 134 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
A coastal Speysider, and this is evident in many of the Inchgower bottlings, including this one. This is quite a fruity dram, with notes of tangerine, lemon, and kiwi. Soft vanilla, coconut, and honey play in the mix, with a lingering salty/seaweed tang on the palate for intrigue. Very clean, light, and surprisingly reserved in oak notes, considering its age. 

      		
 
			
 
Technically a Speyside whisky, but it tastes more like a coastal Northern Highlander. The foundation of this whisky is a lovely honeyed maltiness. It is aged in a sherry cask, which provides layers of rich toffee, caramel, and orange marmalade. Brisk sea salt notes emerge on the palate keeping the whisky fresh and quite lively-the coastal influence-while deft seaweed and spice add complexity. 

      		
 
			
 
Antique gold. Gentle aromas of oak, caramel, and a hint of vanilla and sea breeze. Light-medium body, with a creamy texture. Soft, gentle flavors of vanilla, toffee, subtle fruit and brine, with a dryish oaky finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Amber gold color. Medium bodied and slightly oily. Peaty bonfire aroma and flavors, complemented by a creamy caramel maltiness. Subtle notes of brine, seaweed, and a hint of pear fruit spice things up a bit. Gently dry, moderately smoky finish, with teasing sea salt notes.

   Style: Highland (Jura) single malt Scotch whisky. 

   I have always wondered what a peat smoke infused Isle of Jura whisky would taste like. I was also concerned that too much peat smoke could dominate this whisky's flavor profile. Fortunately, this hasn't happened. The peat smoke is certainly evident, but the Jura character comes through too. One extra bonus: it's bottled at 45%, which kicks the flavors up a notch.
      		
 
			
 
Though as pale as ever, this Lagavulin is hardly in need of a Charles Atlas course. The nose is ozonic, like rock pools at low tide with kelp splattered around. Sweetness comes in the form of cloudy apple juice and a smokehouse kipperiness. The palate is explosive, with masses of retronasal action showing violet root, thyme, juniper, tarragon/fennel, and a finish akin to smoked cheese. An improvement on the 2012 release.
      		
 
			
 
A non-chill filtered, cask strength single malt from Littlemill, vintage 1991. Littlemill’s sweet nose is inviting, with butter toffee, milk chocolate, dried apricot, and straw. On the palate, these notes are joined by a nice maltiness as well as a touch of salt. In the mid-palate we get a touch of spice (black pepper and cinnamon) and some citrus. The finish is medium-length and slightly acidic, a departure for an otherwise affable cask strength whisky. (
)
      		
 
			
 
I’ve known Loch Lomond has been making some peated expressions, and it’s nice to finally see (and taste) some product being bottled with this whisky and its sibling Croftengea, reviewed below. This is my choice of the two, with greater (and more richly textured) flavors to accompany the peat. The smoke is balanced (and tamed) nicely by sweet notes of creamy vanilla, honey, gristy malt, hay, and subtle fruit and spice. The finish remains balanced and lingers with a smoky, lightly salty tang. Fresh and youthful, yet still nicely matured at 13 years old, and a nice alternative to smoky Islay whiskies. 

      		
 
			
 
A big and sappy Longmorn, with notes of chewy toffee, juicy oak, candied fruit, sandalwood, citrus and even some distant smoke. The standard distillery issue of Longmorn 15 year old itself is a big whisky-one of the biggest in Speyside with its rich, malty foundation-but this expression kicks it up a notch. Aging 31 years in a sherry butt injects this whisky with a lot more sherry character along with those woody, citrus spicy notes found in so many older whiskies. While not as clean as the distillery issue and its maltiness is somewhat masked, there’s a lot going on here to entertain the palate. And although one could argue that the sherry is a bit extreme, the equally extreme dry, spicy oak notes provide ample contrast. 

      		
 
			
 
Finished (or ACE’d -- additional cask enhanced -- as they say) in a Madeira cask. Soft in texture, and deceivingly seductive in nature. Pleasingly sweet (honey, caramel, aromas of sticky toffee pudding) with lush summer fruit and gentle spice notes emerging towards the finish. A soft, pleasing Macallan with everything in balance. Nicely done.
      		
 
			
 
This time we’ve got Macallan in savory mode, even a little balsamic. The spirit shows its hand more than in the 1995, with typical Macallan heft. Now you are deep in a forest of yew and larch with a dark chocolate bar for sustenance. Maturity has brought out leather alongside clove and resin. The palate shows a similar tomato note seen in the 1995 cask, with positive bitterness and wedding cake. Though grippy, it has great balance. 285 bottles.  
-> On page 135 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Richly layered. A veritable fruit basket, in addition to nutty toffee, caramel, cocoa powder, and toasted coconut notes, all balanced nicely by oak on the finish. Nice maturity for a relatively young whisky. (Bottled for Maxwell Street Trading Co.)

      		
 
			
 
The richest of the quartet. Super-dense with a note of burnished brass, then light leather and cashew alongside sandalwood. The waxiness and tropical fruit typical of old whiskies is in the background before it moves into lanolin. The palate starts sweetly, with added liqueur cherries, earth, and smoke but for me, after the complex nose it fails to deliver, especially since it is so scarily priced. £600/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
Fresh, briny, and very appetizing. Mouth-coating vanilla, lightly toasted marshmallow, and a kiss of honey add a soothing balance, while pineapple, nectarine, gentle spice, and subtle seaweed offer intrigue. Old Pulteney has great potential if only given the opportunity. Bottling at cask strength and not chill-filtered really brings out more of the whisky’s subtle complexities. I welcome more single cask, cask-strength Pulteneys in the future. (A Park Avenue Liquor exclusive.)

      		
 
			
 
Explorer Jock Wishart’s successful ‘Row to the Pole’ expedition is celebrated with this 3,000 bottle commemorative edition matured in ex-American and ex-Spanish oak sherry casks selected by distillery manager Malcolm Waring. New-mown grass, ripe apples, brine, and a whiff of  Arbroath smokies on the nose. Citrus fruit, spices, and milk chocolate on the palate, with sherry lending gravitas. The finish is sweet, full, and lengthy, with brine returning at the last. £20 (350 ml)
      		
 
			
 
Apart from the 40 year old expression launched in 2012, this is the oldest Old Pulteney on the market, and annual batches are
released with slightly varying strengths. Refill bourbon casks have been used in their maturation. Sweet and zesty on the deceptively youthful nose, with banoffee pie, eating apples, and quite sweet oak on the palate. Cereal notes and pleasing oak in the lengthy finish. £250
      		
 
			
 
Duncansby Head has been aged in a mixture of bourbon and Spanish sherry casks. The nose is initially slightly earthy; then Old Pulteney’s characteristic marine nature develops discreetly, along with icing sugar sprinkled on apple pie and a hint of roasted potato skins. The palate is smooth and chewy, with sherry making its presence felt along with cooked apples, oranges, sultanas, nutmeg, and cocoa. The finish is spicy and nicely rounded. £45/liter
      		
 
			
 
Port Ellen whiskies are getting pretty rare (and expensive). This one is softer and less vibrant than others that I’ve tasted, but still very much Port Ellen, and still enjoyable! Notes of coal tar, rooty licorice, toffee, dark chocolate, and nougat, with background citrus gumdrops, ginger, brine, seaweed, peat bog, and damp oak. I think bottling this at 46% without chill-filtering, or perhaps even cask-strength, would have helped the flavors “zing" (and elevated my rating).
      		
 
			
 
Gold color. Soft, delicate aroma of fruit gum drops, vanilla, and a touch of honey. Light in body, with a soft texture. Its flavors are like its aroma, nicely balanced, with a gentle finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Orange marmalade color. Aromas of ripe fruit (orange, strawberry, red raspberry), caramel, and toffee, with a subtle, Spanish oak resin spiciness. Medium to full in body with a silky texture. Nicely balanced on the palate and very well integrated flavors similar to the aromas. Silky smooth finish. 

      		
 
			
 
The Old Malt Cask ‘Royal Jubilee Commemorative Bottle’ appropriately comes from one of two surviving Scottish distilleries with a ‘royal’ prefix, namely Brackla, located in the Northern Highland region, near Nairn. Maturation has taken place in a refill sherry cask. The nose is like a damp, empty house, with herbal notes, pencil shavings, oranges, and pine needles. Full-bodied and spicy, with freshly-sawn timber, pine, and brittle toffee on the palate. Citric, with camphor and pepper in the finish. 250 bottles. £50
-> On page 136 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
(Reviewer's note: This is a bottling exclusive to Sam's Wine & Spirits in Chicago, IL.) Springbank bottlings over the past few years have been variable, but improving. The less inspiring ones have been too heavily sherried and/or lacked the classic Springbank freshness, liveliness, and briny character one has come to expect from a Campbeltown whisky. This one is indeed from a sherry cask. It's still not the classic Springbanks we were spoiled with in the 1990s, but it's delicious nonetheless. Yes, there's plenty of sherry (and these notes contribute lush fruit, toffee, and nuts), but the youth and zest of this whisky cuts through it and balances it nicely, with those familiar brine and coconut notes interwoven throughout. A bold and satisfying Springer, with more character that the 175th Anniversary 12 year old distillery bottling that has been in circulation.
      		
 
			
 
Powerful, mature, and nicely rounded. Similar in some ways to the Springer 10 year old 46% reviewed below, with the addition of toasted coconut and caramel. It’s also more rounded and with greater depth. 

      		
 
			
 
Full sherry impact, but the Springbank character does manage to fight its way through it. Thick, sweet notes of toffee and molasses are accentuated by dark raisin, golden raisin, prune, date nut cake, and fruit gumdrops. Nutty, briny, rhum agricole finish. A Springbank for sherry lovers. (From a single cask, 591 bottles, exclusively for the U.S.) 
      		
 
			
 
Visit Springbank’s tasting room and you’ll find distillery-only bottlings of all three whisky styles produced by the Campbeltown distillery. But it’s this malt that will probably attract the most interest. Glengyle was officially re-opened in 2004, and in recent years Springbank has released a work in progress each year. What makes this unusual is the fact that the maturing malt is held in a cask which is kept at least half full, and each year it is topped up with malt from 2004, through the solera method. This year, then, the oldest malt is six years old. The nose definitely suggests a work in progress, and is immature, rootsy, and meaty, though some orange and citrus fruit notes are there, too. On the palate there’s plenty to be encouraged by, with some spearmint and menthol, developing fruitiness, earthy peat, and distinctive salt and spice. 
      		
 
			
 
A round of single cask Springers matured completely (not finished) in various wine casks for the U.S. market. All four are solid efforts — it’s really a matter of personal preference. A general comment: most of the single cask releases are matured in some sort of wine or rum cask. While this is nice, I would love to see several single cask, cask strength, and fully-matured ex-bourbon barrel bottlings offered for a change. 

Complex citrus (orange, tangerine, lime, and a hint of lemon), honeyed malt kissed by maple syrup, caramelized pineapple, cinnamon, and a dusting of nutmeg. Nutty toffee on the finish. 
      		
 
			
 
A round of single cask Springers matured completely (not finished) in various wine casks for the U.S. market. All four are solid efforts — it’s really a matter of personal preference. A general comment: most of the single cask releases are matured in some sort of wine or rum cask. While this is nice, I would love to see several single cask, cask strength, and fully-matured ex-bourbon barrel bottlings offered for a change. 

What you might expect a traditional 100% oloroso sherry cask-aged Springbank to taste like, with probably the most familiar flavor profile of the four: rich, with nuts and dried fruit, chocolate-coated brittle toffee, plenty of spice (cinnamon, ginger), polished oak, hint of tobacco and smoke. 
      		
 
			
 
The immediate shore-like blast suggests that the sweet amoroso casks haven’t been overly enthusiastic in their embrace. What seems to have happened is that while giving some date and prune they have added an extra layer of oak — giving a charred element — and, like Lagavulin, hints of tar. The smoke is obscured and the pepper is Javanese. It’s a polite Talisker, but the absorption of the smoke means it has lost something integral to its being. 
      		
 
			
 
Previously only available as part of Diageo’s annual Special Releases program, and now bottled at the classic Talisker strength of 45.8%, instead of cask strength. Initially salty, then sweet and spicy on the nose, with summer berries, heather honey, and an earthy note, plus subtle peat. Spicy and drying on the slightly waxy palate, with licorice, aniseed, and prominent peat embers. The finish is medium in length, peppery, and relatively tannic. £225 
      		
 
			
 
As it progresses toward the ultimate goal of an 18 year old expression in 2015, Arran has released a 16 year old, matured in 30
percent sherry hogsheads and 70 percent bourbon casks. The edition is limited to 9,000 bottles. The nose features malt, milk chocolate, and honey, with a citric edge. The palate mirrors the nose with more malt, honey, and milk chocolate, plus ginger, nutmeg, and spicy oak. Spiced fruits in the lengthy finish. £45
      		
 
			
 
Not all Speyside whiskies are big, masculine, and sherried. Some are gentler, as is this expression of Tamnavulin. The whisky is creamy and smooth in texture, with notes of vanilla custard, honeyed malt, and even a hint of marshmallow and hay. Very soothing finish. This is one of the most polished Tamnavulin whiskies I’ve tasted recently (and going from 40% to 43% in strength provided some extra richness and body). Whisky with dessert, anyone? 

-> On page 137 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
This 21 year old from Tobermory is of the peated Ledaig variety, though sampling confirms that the level of peating in Ledaig malt has been significantly ramped up since this was produced. Sweet on the nose, with subtle aromatic smoke, unsalted butter, peaches in syrup, and heather honey. Luscious and viscous on the sweet, fruity palate, with honey, underlying soft spices, and some gentle smoke. Slowly drying in the finish to licorice root and black coffee. £110
      		
 
			
 
Fragrant and very clean. Gently sweet with notes of vanilla cream, ripe barley, fresh cut hay, sherbet (orange and lemon), and a hint of bourbon -especially on the finish. An enjoyable and undemanding whisky to drink when the whisky itself isn’t the main topic of conversation. 

      		
 
			
 
The "Gentle Dram," it says on the bottle’s label, and it certainly is one of the gentler whiskies in Speyside. It’s a fragrant whisky too with a firm malty foundation, fruit gum drops and caramel. Subtle notes of almond and anise helped keep my interest, as did its soft, subtle wood spice finish. Very easy to drink too! 

      		
 
			
 
The latest release from Tomatin distillery is a limited edition (3,150 bottles) 15 year old that has been matured in a combination of second-fill bourbon barrels and tempranillo wine casks (the grape of full-bodied Spanish reds like those from Rioja). The nose offers fruit cocktail and salted popcorn, while milk chocolate, vanilla, and nutty caramel notes emerge. Soft chocolate, bananas, and autumn berries on the slightly peppery palate. The finish is nutty, with lingering spice, peppery oak, and finally a lengthy, creamy sensation.
      		
 
			
 
This portwood finish from Tomatin was matured for some 13 years in bourbon casks before being transferred for a final period of aging in Portuguese tawny port pipes, which had matured port for between 30 and 40 years. Initially reticent on the nose, with soft fruit notes, honey, and toffee, turning to cherry cough lozenges. Gently spiced on the nutty palate, with peaches and Cherryade. The finish is medium in length and always fruity.
      		
 
			
 
Mashy peat notes on the early nose, then sherry, vanilla, and white pepper. Mouth-coating, with new leather and sweet spices on the palate. Gentle smokiness and black coffee gradually come to the fore. The finish is medium in length, with sweet, nutty peat which gradually dries.
      		
 
			
 
Initially drier on the nose than the Fino expression, then caramel appears, along with milk chocolate and vanilla. More pronounced leathery notes than the Fino; fuller bodied and fruitier on the palate, with the fruit developing a salty tang. Lingering salty fruit and spices in the finish, with final dark chocolate.
      		
 
			
 
Full sherry and old leather on the nose. Dried fruits, and finally a hint of meat extract. Rich, sweet, and sherried on the palate, with nutty spices. Medium to long in the spicy finish, with black currant and raisin notes.
      		
 
			
 
The latest Tullibardine vintage release to hit the States is another example of whisky distilled in 1993, but now bottled at 18 years of age. The initial nose features cut grass and sliced melon, with freshly-peeled tree bark. Intensifying sweetness with time. Quite rich and full on the palate, with cereal, soft fudge, and mild ginger. The finish is medium in length, insistently spicy, with oak and vanilla notes. 
      		
 
			
 
This 20 year old expression of Tullibardine has been aged in first-fill bourbon barrels, like its younger stablemate Sovereign. Caramel, honey, cocoa, and a hint of linseed oil on the nose. The palate is creamy, with strawberries, warm milk chocolate, and allspice. Long and soft in the finish, which is reminiscent of choc-ice. At 20, this single malt has gained in richness and sophistication, with an extremely enticing flavor profile.
-> On page 138 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Made from a mash containing a whopping 80% rye. The antithesis of the 21 year old reviewed above. This is one bold rye whiskey which gets more powerful as it develops on the palate. It’s crisp, clean, and very spicy (cool mint, hot cinnamon), with molasses, caramel, honey, golden raisin, kiwi, coconut shavings, and a dusting of cocoa. A lighter-weight whiskey when compared to High West’s flagship Rendezvous Rye, but this whiskey throws a mean punch!
      		
 
			
 
A blend of two different bourbons—one 6 years old, the other 10 years old—with different mashbills. Nicely balanced sweet notes (caramel, butterscotch), fruit (orange, sultana, cherry) and gentle spice (vanilla, cinnamon). Nothing fancy or exotic here; just a solid, versatile, well-rounded bourbon. (Available at the High West General Store.) 
      		
 
			
 
High West has a second version of Valley Tan. The “Utah oat whiskey” was distilled to 87.5% (about the same proof as single pot still Irish, and technically a “light whiskey”), aged 2 to 4 years in new and used cooperage. A light golden color; nose is somewhat spicy, with a licorice/peppermint tinge and some alcohol heat. It's quite smooth, almost Irish in its drinkability, with grainy notes graced with that light peppermint and biscuit sweetness. Pleasant sipper indeed.
      		
 
			
 
Tropical in nature, with pineapple, coconut, and kiwi. Additional notes of vanilla, caramel, new-mown hay, and light marzipan. Creamy on the palate throughout. A lovely whiskey, but the two finished versions above have it beat.
      		
 
			
 
Mackmyra has used 30-liter casks held underground in the Bodås mine, the archipelago repository on Fjäderholmarna, and the forest repository in the Whisky Village in Gävle. Bruised banana, ground almond, Horlicks, spearmint, and budding foliage characterize the nose. The fruity whirlpool of flavor includes apple, watermelon, and poached pears, a second wave of dried fruits and fudge, all anchored by a clean edge of Kendal mint cake. Bubblegum on dilution. A final rush of coffee/cocoa before a sweet, juicy finish. €130
      		
 
			
 
Bear Republic’s Racer 5 IPA has long been a beloved California craft beer. Charbay distiller Marko Karakasevic liked it so much he made whiskey from it. The Clear (aged 22 months in stainless tanks) sings with hoppy citrus zest and pine notes set in a sweet background. It’s nicely nuanced in the mouth, though, with a creamy body that sparkles with bitter orange and grapefruit floating over understated malt. Preferred over his Doubled & Twisted; this is more sophisticated. 
      		
 
			
 
After 6 years aging in charred new oak, and 8 years in “non-oak vessels” (stainless tanks), there’s a nose of oak, cedar, tart red plums, gooseberries, and fresh putty, but none of the heat you’d expect. Explosive in the mouth: sweet fruit and dry oak slam-dance and set off a surprising burst of hops (wash was craft-brewed pilsner). Exciting stuff, but a bit hot, even with water. 
      		
 
			
 
This expression of the triple-distilled Lowland single malt is a 14 year old single cask bottling, and just 314 bottles are available. Fresh pineapple and vanilla toffee on the fragrant, soft nose. The palate is lively and fruity, with lemon zest, caramel, a hint of black pepper, and then deeper fruit notes of ripe peach. The finish is quite lengthy, with lingering fruit flavors. £55
      		
 
			
 
It's not often that the blended whisky section can be described as 'the group of death' but at most other times this whisky would shine. It's a very good whisky, rich in flavor and punching above its 40% ABV, mixing creamy vanilla, pureed peach and apricot, key lime pie, chocolate, and manuka honey to great effect. It's soft and rounded, with little obvious oak, and the finish is feather-light, with a slightly fruit sponge finale. £50
      		
 
			
 
Rich and malty and, though it’ll look like I’m just reading the label, there is
chocolate here: chocolate brownie mix to be precise, with a raspberry sitting
on top. Bold and rich, with a nutty underpinning. Water makes it very fresh and
a little more hay-like. The palate is sweet and liquorous, with nougat,
macadamia, and a chewy mid-palate where that chocolate dribbles and melts.
Neat, it is slightly bitter; less so with water. Very sound. £53
-> On page 139 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
The latest batch of single cask releases from Wemyss Malts includes this 22 year old expression of Glen Scotia, matured in a bourbon barrel that provided 304 bottles. The nose offers soft spices, orchard fruits, and a faint hint of ozone. Richly fruity on the palate, with mandarin oranges, vanilla, and a sprinkling of sea salt. The finish is gingery and warming, with light smoke, aniseed, and plain chocolate at the close. £100
      		
 
			
 
The latest batch of single cask releases from Wemyss Malts includes Vanilla Summer. It is an unspecified Highland single malt, distilled in 1997, and the bourbon cask in which it was matured has yielded 263 bottles. Vanilla, buttercups, and violets on the nose, developing Bramley apples with peaches and cream. Background of mildly spicy malt. Sweet and floral on the palate, with tropical fruits, fudge, and ginger. Slowly drying with benevolent oak, but ultimately a lingering creaminess. £50 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
The first of three Iron Dram single cask Amrut whiskies released for the European market. The 
 cask certainly has the upper hand here. Black cherry, dried cranberry, blueberry, and mixed peel mingle with apple peelings, baked pear, thick-skinned sultanas, and chocolate frosting. Tart piquancy to the fore on the palate, but it melts to show glacé cherry, baked apples, pear, and ground almonds. Water brings the childhood sweetness of old-fashioned Kola Kubes. Oodles of character. £77
      		
 
			
 
More rounded, with greater depth when compared to the 8 year old offering. Not as medicinal and less sweet, more toffee and less honey, with more dried spice interwoven throughout. The herbs are still there, along with licorice root. Dry, burning-ember finish. Nicely balanced, which makes it my favorite of the three.

      		
 
			
 
Diageo is releasing five triple matured single malts, all exclusive to Friends of the Classic Malts and without age statements. Initial maturation was in refill casks, followed by a period in charred American oak hogsheads, and finally European oak refill casks. Sweet on the nose, with heather honey and gingerbread; slightly herbal. Resinous and waxy. Cloves, cinnamon, oak, and black pepper notes on the buttery palate. Medium length in the finish, with lingering cloves and freshly-sawn oak. £80
      		
 
			
 
Young it certainly is. Precocious even, and a pallid-looking youth on first impression, but behind that bland exterior is freshness and life with a fragrance that is very un-Balmenach, all chilled Muscat grapes, melon, even some cucumber. This general perfumed zinginess continues on the tongue, though the weight of the distillate (Balmenach has worm tubs) anchors it well. It’s not about age — it’s about character. Enjoy. 
      		
 
			
 
The Private Cellar range is a cask strength, single cask range where St. George's can have some fun and dip a toe into uncharted waters. Triple distillation makes the whisky smoother, sweeter, and more rounded…which shouldn't work with the earthy, rustic style of St. George’s. It does —big time. There are rum and raisin notes, and a creaminess that masks the sappy youthfulness of the whisky (it's 5 years old).   £148
      		
 
			
 
Distilled, as the name suggests, in a (Glasgow-built) Coffey still at the Miyagikyo distillery, here we have a corn-based grain with masses of gentle custard tart aromas alongside peach and corn fatness. The mouth is ripe and slow, with banana skin and fruit peels leading to a mellow mid-palate section, where vanilla comes through. It’s all about the feel. €145
      		
 
			
 
One might assume this to be just a smoky version of the standard Famous Grouse (with its honeyed malt, bright fruit, and floral demeanor). But, in addition to the enhanced smoke (which caringly adds a new dimension without smothering the other flavors), there also seems to be more malt body and oak spice in the mix, which I think takes Black Grouse to a higher level than Famous Grouse. The grain whisky contributes a “drinkability” component, making it a great introduction to smoky whiskies.
      		
 
			
 
Patrick van Zuidam uses rye as part of his genever, but when a farmer phoned up saying he had a surplus, he figured he might as well try a 100% rye whisky. Of similarly deep hue to the 8 year old, but a little more ruddy, this has a more waxy aroma, but with fresh rye sourdough penetrating. The spiciness which typifies rye here has a North African edge: cumin, cinnamon, coriander seed. The palate is less explosive and dusty than American examples; this is more of a slow-burning fuse that passes through orange and smooth, sweet oak before the spices return. £46
-> On page 140 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Only four first-fill bourbon barrels have been disgorged for this year’s unpeated release, so be quick. Vanilla frosting, marzipan, white pepper, and coconut snowballs emit from the glass. The mouthfeel has a satin sheen, with flavors of sweet honey, peach syrup, orange segments, ground pepper, and some almond nuttiness. It holds its poise as it gently dilutes, comforting like a warm blanket over your taste buds. A few drops of water produce a rounder, sweeter experience. €60
      		
 
			
 
Patrick Maguire, who now heads up Hobart’s Sullivan’s Cove distillery started work with Bill Lark before taking over Sullivan’s Cove in 2003. A French-design brandy still produces a very floral, sweet, and full-flavored spirit with notes of lime blossom and wood sap. It’s a bold distillate, but there’s sufficient sweetness and fragrant spice to balance. €95
      		
 
			
 
Sullivans Cove whisky is matured in French oak and bottled as single cask offerings, and there is a big variation in taste. As a rule of thumb, though, anything with a number higher than 330 is worth checking out. This is a standout, moving away from the Speyside-style fruitiness of some casks toward treacle, chicory coffee, and burnt hazelnut on the nose. The taste has apricot, sweet orange, honey, cinnamon, and menthol, and the finish is soft and light. A$95
      		
 
			
 
The first Kilkerran “work in progress” bottling from Glengyle distillery appeared in 2009, and the ultimate aim is to bottle a 12 year old expression. For now, we have separate sherry butt-matured and bourbon barrel-matured expressions for 2013. The bourbon-aged variant offers vanilla, cinnamon, milk chocolate, ripe apples, and ultimately, slightly smoky mango notes on the nose. Spicy on the palate, with blood orange and a hint of peat smoke. The medium-length finish is drying, with a wisp of smoke. £38
      		
 
			
 
Here is Auchroisk at its more lifted and clean. A whiff of cooking lentils (a lovely smell) alongside lime and cottage cheese (again nice), it gives the impression of a healthy salad. The palate is sweet and quite buttery, with minimal attention from oak; instead it’s all very spring-like, with good mid-palate sweetness. Water dries it slightly, but also extends the palate. Quite lovely.
      		
 
			
 
The new, elder sibling to the standard Bulleit. It shows the Bulleit personality, but it’s deeper and drier on the nose and palate (as would be expected), with more oak, dried orchard fruit, and dark berried fruit, along with a hint of barrel char, leather, vanilla powder, and a dusting of cinnamon. I’d save this as a postprandial bourbon, and opt for the standard Bulleit as an aperitif. 
      		
 
			
 
Mature on the nose, mixing the tropical fruits of age with blanched almond. As it opens, you encounter Moscato grapes dusted with white pepper. Grows in sweetness. The palate continues this theme with the fruits (blueberry, raspberry, and pomegranate) typical of the distillery character, given a waxy coating by age. Unctuous and good. Water rather pulls the flesh from the bones, revealing its age, so leave well enough alone. (3,756 bottles)
      		
 
			
 
A new wheated bourbon from Heaven Hill, using wheat instead of rye in the mashbill, resulting in a smooth, easygoing whiskey. Layers of sweetness (creamy vanilla, maple syrup, marzipan) combine with blackberry jam and cinnamon. Gentle polished oak on the finish adds drying balance to the sweet notes. Nicely done and reasonably priced!
      		
 
			
 
Sweet reek of the warehouse; sugary bourbon drooling and drying on oak staves, the richly boozy air, dusty wood. It’s all here, like Bardstown in a bottle. Enters with authority, a hot rush of corn, solidly oak-edged, sizzling with allspice and cinnamon, and backed with a solid strop of leather. Then the sun comes up: a sweet, glowing finish. Beautifully bridges the gap between young and old bourbon, and an absolute steal at the price.
      		
 
			
 
The dark color shouts “sherried!” and the nose confirms. After an initial blast of marzipan there’s rosin, stewed Assam tea, some licorice, hard treacle toffee, truffle, and a charred element, all backed with an earthy undertow. The palate is tight and quite hot, with charred red pepper and a bosky, wooded note. Not a great fan of water — this is about that deep, fungal stuff — there’s an uplift of sweet dark fruits at the end, offering balance. £105
-> On page 141 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Now listen up class, it’s time for your next whisky lesson. Here the educational blend contains 20% very old single malt, which delivers a nose of citrus peel, honey, air-dried ham, and some spices in the background. Quite delicious, with orange, vanilla sponge, raisin, cremola foam assuaged by plain chocolate, and Black Forest gateau. This concoction is further tweaked three ways to complete Reference Series II. A truly great drink in its own right that makes learning fun again. £56
      		
 
			
 
Hot wet oak, berries, Red Hots, and wet cornmeal. Closer to the nose, it’s sharper and woodier. Lots of wood on the entry, but sweet corn and cloved hard candy, too, with heat from the 100 proof that lingers through the oaky finish. At 7 years, this is extra-spicy, and a touch of water tames the heat and the oak. Bowman’s still finding its way, but the path seems right.
      		
 
			
 
J.P. Wiser’s signature is on the label, but the whisky itself bears the toasted-oak hallmarks of Corby master blender Dr. Don Livermore. There’s a lot to enjoy in this creamy, lush whisky. An initial blast of sweet caramel lingers as sour rye and bitter citrus pith emerge. These soon grow into hot gingery fizz and burned toffee. Dark fruits turn to citrus notes and cherry licorice while sizzling ginger mellows into softly glowing white pepper.
      		
 
			
 
Although only two years older, this expression of Hakushu — the first to be launched in the U.S. — shows a fleshier side to the distillery’s wares. While it has retained the freshness of the 10 year old, it shows more pineapple and grapefruit on the nose, with a little fragrance of jasmine and osmanthus. On the palate, it’s fresh and lively with a hint of persimmon and a tickle of smoke. Recommended.
      		
 
			
 
A hot and spicy nose: dry rye, sweet mint, and alcohol heat. Hot on the tongue too, with the mint flashing across an oily graininess. The finish is where it finally cools down, laying down thin layers of sweet mint and light chocolate on the palate. Water tames the heat and brings out more chocolate, but steals that nice finish. Not overly approachable, but…it’s rye.
      		
 
			
 
That’s “.36” as in ’36 caliber,’ the first of this Texas distiller’s Small Caliber Series of Texas bourbon whiskeys. Sharpish on the nose with some hot alcohol, cinnamon, and oak, warmed by burnt sugar and vanilla. A kick of hot oak spice on the tongue, a flush of hot, dry corn, and flashes of mint and vanilla, then a long, spicy finish with more dry mint. One of the better young bourbons — only 8 months — I’ve had. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
I'm not sure that if you loved Cask 4 you'd be so pleased with Cask 5, because it's completely different. This has the shadow of Bill Lark all over it, with big, over-cooked red apple flavors combining with walnut oil, orange liqueur, treacle toffee, stewed berries, and some oaky astringency. It's rich, full, complex, and a grower — and I can feel a new love affair starting right here. A$110
      		
 
			
 
An unabashedly spicy rye nose backed by cinnamon, marzipan, Bartlett pear, and oak. The rye spice is right there on the palate and immediately joined by cinnamon, clove, black pepper, solid oak, and a lingering pear note on the fringe. The finish is long, dry, and spicy with a hint of black licorice candy. Pritchard’s rye is a perfect example of how you can have strong spice without a lot of fire, and create balance without adding a lot of sweetness.
      		
 
			
 
With some powerhouse whiskies in the blend (including an '87 Bunnahabhain), it’s a surprise that the nose is so reserved, with citrus, ginger, and honey. On the palate you need your flavor shovel to unearth a core of typically strong flavors, including leather, oak, salt, dark chocolate, and even 
. It’s delicious but highly elusive. The finish is medium and quite dry. What an odd blend. I haven’t had to work this hard for a blend in a long time. (
)
      		
 
			
 
This breaks Blue Hanger ranks because it's a traditional blended whisky rather than a blend of just malts. Not that you see the joins. This is a rich, powerful, clean, and crisp whisky with a delightfully balanced flavor of pureed fruits and an unusual, almost menthol quality. Smoke wanders in and out to complete the experience. 
-> On page 142 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Sourced from several undisclosed Kentucky bourbon distillers. Well-rounded and nicely balanced, with prominent spice (cinnamon, clove, evergreen, powdered vanilla), soft fruit (mandarin, coconut, apricot, hint of pineapple), and toasted nuts, all on a bed of caramel. Very versatile: mature enough for pleasurable sipping (but just), and youthful enough to add zing to a cocktail. 
      		
 
			
 
Very bright gold. This shows some of the warm tatami/dry grass notes seen in Yamazaki 12 year old, this time overlaid with fruit stones, banana chips, fresh persimmon, and, once it opens, cask-generated aromas of crème brûlée, cinnamon toast, caramelized sugar, and cotton candy. The palate is sweet and lush with plenty of vanilla ice cream, but there’s sufficient acidity to maintain freshness and prevent things from getting too flabby. £70
      		
 
			
 
This veteran Old Malt Cask offering was distilled in Glen Mhor, Inverness during 1982. The early nose is very fruity, with Jelly Babies, then icing sugar and almonds come through, accompanied by supple malt. A good mouthfeel, with the fruitiness following on from the nose, joined by spicy toffee, a wisp of wood smoke, and old oak. The finish is medium to long, slightly resinous, and citric with a dash of cocoa and a hint of peat.  £115
      		
 
			
 
The last eighteen months have been very good ones for blended and blended malt Scotch whisky. Shackleton and Compass Box set out in a fresh direction and there were top releases from the likes of Johnnie Walker and Blue Hanger. So quality brands from the likes of Grant’s have to rethink. This is well made, tasty, balanced, complex, and drinkable without water or a mixer. But shouldn’t a premium whisky justify a strength of 46% ABV? I think so. £50
      		
 
			
 
This new Jack Daniel’s offering is marketed as being “bold and smooth.” It certainly is bolder when compared to the standard Jack Daniel’s offering, with a mélange of corn, creamy vanilla, toasted caramel, bright citrus, and dry resinous oak spiked with cinnamon. The smoothness ends, however, when the oak grip intensifies on the finish. Adding ice does tame the oak, if that’s your thing. Still, I’d prefer the oak be more restrained. Price is per liter.
      		
 
			
 
In June 2013, flooding washed away most of Highwood’s finished whisky. Although barrels in the warehouse went unscathed, new releases such as this one have been limited. Too bad. Initial nose tickle erupts into sweet caramel and rich black fruits. Hot pepper trickling down your throat leaves a lovely hot burn followed by waves of sweet saltwater taffy. Yes, it’s slightly salty. Weighty and mouth-coating, this whisky feels big and full in the mouth. (
      		
 
			
 
This export-only Pike Creek reminds us of the year-to-year differences we can expect from whisky that spends Canada’s brutal winters (and sweltering summers) in unheated warehouses. Slightly younger than the Canada-only version, this is just different enough to be its own whisky. Gingery hot pepper laces its way through sweet, ripe red fruit as vague menthol with a slight herbal edge slips gently into silky oak tannins. Finishes cleanly with a citrus pithiness. 
      		
 
			
 
This was barrel-aged for a year, then “brightened” to white clarity; just the slightest hint of amber remains. But the aging has taken away the shouty greenness of new make; the nose is clean, a light blend of corn and woodsy vanilla. Sweet flavors bubble on the tongue: coconut, circus peanuts, peanut butter fudge, vanilla, jellybeans. The finish lingers in corn and rye. There’s more than meets the eye here, and it’s priced for impulsive experimentation.
      		
 
			
 
Cooley produced some great Irish single malt whiskeys and this is no slouch, either. It pulls off the trick of being both very Irish, with sweet, lush pear, fermenting apple, and yellow fruit notes; and of being distinctively a single malt, mainly because the barley is held in check by just enough influence of tannin and spice. It's a bit like a fruit cordial, and the oak doesn't overstay its welcome. A nice pepper flourish in the finish.
      		
 
			
 
Edited is the medium peated version of Paul John, and will be followed later in the year with a big peated one. This will do for now, though. The whisky is once more intense and fruity but this time it plays off against a more herbal green apple note, smoke from the hearth, and a touch of spice. There’s also cinnamon—which is fast becoming a house style. Encouraging stuff.
-> On page 143 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
This is the second release from this tiny independent Swedish distillery and it takes a confident step forward from the first, though it's not the finished article yet. The youthfulness is there but there's much to admire, too: citrus notes, mainly lemon, some melon, tropical fruit (mango, perhaps?), and some soft orange fruits make for a gentle, almost blend-like whisky. Late saltiness and a touch of pepper ensure it's not cloying, and distinctively Swedish. Very encouraging.
      		
 
			
 
What a difference a cask can make. This first-fill bourbon barrel has more robust flavors but noticeably less color than its antecedent, Cask 1. Linseed oil, raw canvas, and freshly dug blue clay form a rich, earthy base for flourishes of clean spirit, dry straw, and Chinese plum sauce. Hot pepper and pulling dry wood yield to
cherry blossoms, maraschino, and sautéed mushrooms. A splash of water unveils milk chocolate, rye crisps, and creamy custard. C$100
      		
 
			
 
Rye grain, Bavarian sour rye bread, rich linseed oil, and vague hints of peppermint drift out of the bottle when you first pull the cork. The sweet, oily palate is alive with ginger and wasabi, accented by acetone, high fruity esters, and teasing hints of sweet flowers. Notes of plasticine and the earthiness of river plants add complexity. The whisky sizzles with pepper throughout, returning to sour rye as the finish fades ever so slowly.
      		
 
			
 
Full oaky nose, with the brash power of youth. Zingy and bright, with corn, sweet and hot mint, chunky oak, and a warm, spicy-sweet finish. On the front edge of the bell curve for 4 to 6 year old bourbons; plenty of spunk. Not for someone who wants a mellow glass, this one's lively. Sourced whiskey. 
      		
 
			
 
The Old Particular non-chill filtered single cask expression of Highland Park was distilled in November 1995, matured in a refill hogshead, and bottled in December 2013. The outturn was 322 bottles. Initially quite reticent on the nose, then toffee, cardboard, table salt, and very faint smoke. Quite viscous on the palate, and dry peat becomes relatively prominent, with allspice and sea salt. The finish offers licorice and lingering spices. £100
      		
 
			
 
What would you expect from an 8 year old Laphroaig? Iodine, massive peat, aggression? Not here. Rather, there’s a soft marine sweetness akin to lobster thermidor, with hints of salinity and tarragon. It builds in heft, and smoke, but there is real balance. Complex already. The palate initially shows muted smoke, and is slightly medicinal, with balancing creaminess. Water shatters this idyll somewhat, as the phenols come out in full force. It depends what side you want. I’d grab some. £60
      		
 
			
 
This cask strength whisky is malty in the nose, along with peach, nectarine, and subtle oak. The entry is all malt, the kind of flavor that evokes "malt reverence." In the mid-palate it’s cereal grains spiced with allspice and black pepper. The finish is long and slightly salty, with a fair amount of heat from the alcohol, and a touch of oak. If you love the singular flavor of malt, this one may be for you. (
)
      		
 
			
 
Cask # 1013 from Edradour was filled on March 5
, 2002 and bottled on February 26
, 2014 at 11 years of age. It has not been chill filtered and is offered at natural color. The nose yields sultanas, cloves, and sherry, plus an earthy aroma and a hint of machine oil. The palate is silky, with sweet sherry, digestive biscuits, soft spices, dates, and figs. The finish is medium and fruity, with dark chocolate-covered candy. £42
      		
 
			
 
The closed grain distillery niche is small, but Cambus rightly has its followers. The latest in a series of sequential cask releases from Signatory, this refill butt signals a grassy nose of green hay bales, tangerine, potting compost, white pepper, and almond-studded nougat. To drink, it’s like joyously biting into a tangerine marshmallow, to be rewarded with thick cloudy puffs of flavor with a peppery accompaniment.  Dabble with the water to reveal the delights of orange creamsicle pie. £65
      		
 
			
 
A 1996 expression is the latest Clynelish to take its place in the Connoisseurs’ Choice lineup. Maturation occurred in refill sherry butts. Fruity on the nose, with ripe bananas, malt, dark toffee, lemongrass, and a splash of brine. Ultimately, a green, herbal note. Relatively full-bodied, creamy and slightly waxy on the palate; spicy sherry, Golden Delicious apples, and old leather. The finish is medium to long, with lingering ginger. £60
-> On page 144 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Sweet on the nose, with malt, stewed apple, apricots, sherry, and warm spices. Finally, caramel. Quite viscous in the mouth; the palate continues the sweet, malty, spicy theme. Ginger and soft fruits in the medium-length finish. Straightforward and very drinkable. Exclusively available to travelers at World Duty Free Group stores in selected airports throughout the UK and Spain. £46/liter
      		
 
			
 
With a bottle shape that makes you want to go bowling, this blend has admirable balance between the fruit and the smoke on the nose. The bonfire smoke is matched with aromas of tarte tartin, pecan nut, red apple, and sultana. Smooth and molten in the mouth, it has more weight and body than its older brother. There is citrus, apples, and the late arrival of baked spices, cookie dough, and mint chocolate on the finish.
      		
 
			
 
While it’s not technically a grain, buckwheat makes great pancakes, so buckwheat whiskey? Otay! This has an earthy aroma of hickory nuts and autumn leaves with some cinnamon peeking through; reminds me of Corsair’s quinoa whiskey. There’s a cushioned, creamy mouthfeel, more raw nuts, a keen of oak, a sweet lift through the mouth, and at the end, the leaves and more oak. Unique, intriguing, compelling; I keep going back for one more taste. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Single barrel releases aren’t uncommon at craft bars, but a whiskey distilled by the bar’s proprietor is rare. Dark amber color suggests high barrel impact, but the wood is actually well balanced by caramel, milk chocolate, and honey-nut cereal. The opening is much softer, lusher than you’d expect at this proof, and balances in the mid-palate with oak, salt, cinnamon, and a little heat. A dry finish rounds out a unique and flavorful whiskey. 
      		
 
			
 
Bernard Walsh hand selects the 12 year old whiskey for this bottling, using only first-fill bourbon casks. The rich, tawny color has a nose of caramelizing sugars, gingersnaps, peanut brittle, and stewed fruits of apple and rhubarb. Rich flavors of butterscotch caramels, orange twist, oak, and that ginger intensity which persists with a slight bitterness. There’s a big hit of grapefruit as it reaches its zenith, before it mellows to a dry, nutty conclusion. (2,200 bottles to be released annually)
      		
 
			
 
Most flavored whiskeys start with an existing whiskey and add flavoring, but Bushel & Barrel comes at it from the other end, mixing Berentzen’s apple liqueur with a Kentucky bourbon. Bright, crisp apple cider defines the opening, while in the mid-palate subtle bourbon notes emerge with vanilla, honey, cinnamon, and light oak. The bourbon notes complement the sweet apple cider and help keep things from getting too sweet. Bourbon and cider have always been buddies, and they do quite well together here.
      		
 
			
 
Light amber with that touch of acetone, along with marzipan, green apple, fruit blossom, and a runny caramel toffee/crème brûlée which adds width, while toasty oak and ginger biscuit give structure and spice. Again, a lovely, almost oily feel — it’s Dewar’s equivalent of Linkwood — balancing fragrance with surprising depth in the mouth. Water brings the oak into play and tightens the palate. 
£125
      		
 
			
 
Razor-sharp aromas of clove, seasoned wood, and dried grass push firmly out of the glass. Hard-edged grain and spice continue on the palate, but without the harshness you might expect from young whiskey with such a bold nose. It softens toward the finish and becomes sweeter, with a hint of buttery fudge, then develops an oaky dryness at the end. Impressive young whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Sweet malt, old fruit pastilles (less intense), and subtle mesquite smoke. Unlike some craft smoked whiskeys, this doesn’t grab you by the throat; it’s enticing. Bigger on the tongue, but still not overwhelming, and there’s some dark, spicy chocolate and pepper coming out.
      		
 
			
 
This is bursting with barley, sweet oak, and all-butter shortbread. There are charcoal sticks too, which add a cool smoke note. The taste is like a warm hug on a cold morning; flavors of butter toffee, orange, poached pear, and ginger snaps, which combine to keep that deep smoke in balance. The harmony continues into the lengthy finish with flavors of citrus, melon, and ground ginger.
-> On page 145 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
This wee, sleekit, cow’rin, tim’rous beastie is a blended malt of Highland whiskies from Douglas Laing, the latest of their regional recipes to join Scallywag and Big Peat. Perfumed soaps in muslin bags, dried sprigs of heather, beeswax, and Edinburgh rock give this an intriguing bouquet. Juicy: mandarins glow with green plums and Granny Smith apples. Ripe, yellow fruits and spices mid-palate conclude with sweet malt and fading creaminess sweeping around the gums. Distinctive and laudable. £39
      		
 
			
 
Drawn from a pair of casks filled back in 1962, this brings out dried mango strips, white chocolate, melon, honeysuckle, and light vanilla with pepper and cumin around the fringes. Plenty to explore. Maple syrup flavors with plenty of thick tannins, but its vitality is intact. Darker, verging on bitter notes appear later on as it melds into rootsy, funky territory with burnt butter, deep vanilla, treacle, and spiced coffee. More wood with dry nuttiness on the finish. Leave off the water. £500
      		
 
			
 
Mild and mellow nose of corn and oak, with a bit of warehouse reek, and a light, cleanly earthy note. Smooth and sweet in the mouth, with sweet cornmeal and sunny meadowgrass, a touch of candied cinnamon. A very friendly and easy-going bourbon, not too young, not too old. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
A rare barrel strength 100% rye release from a craft distiller. (Dark Horse, Lenexa, Kan.) No age statement on this other than “less than four years.” Young wood leads things off with pencil, graphite, and sawdust. Once you get past the sharp wood, there’s lush maple, brown sugar, cinnamon, and rye spice. At 113 proof it’s still soft, supple, and lush but slightly tannic. The finish is spicy but not overly hot or dry. Great distilling hampered by small barrels, but still something special.
      		
 
			
 
Starts off sweet, followed by nutmeg, cinnamon, clean oak, and a zesty bitterness. This austere yet elegant whisky slowly develops a deep complexity. Silky corn and bourbon-like vanilla toffee override distinct suggestions of apple juice, as dusty rye along with hints of dry grass lead into mashy cereal notes. Finishes with tightly integrated flavors of white pepper, gingery spices, hints of fresh-cut wood, and hot peppermint. Lovely. (Canada only) C$37
      		
 
			
 
A peat-smoked malt whiskey from Ireland’s Cooley distillery, similar to many smoky Scotch whiskies. The difference to me is that I don’t get as much of the seaweed and coastal notes often found in the Scotch whiskies. Still, there is plenty going on in this whisky, including a lovely creamy vanilla and honeyed malt underbelly to tame the smoke. It reveals more of itself with the addition of water. If there were peat-smoked Lowland Scotch whiskies, they might taste like this. 

      		
 
			
 
The fifth vintage of Knappogue Castle and the second consecutive one comprised of whiskey from the Bushmills distillery. (The previous three were from the Cooley Distillery.) This one is very clean and quite soft on the palate, with a gentle sweetness throughout (fresh malt, vanilla, and honey). Floral and citrus notes offer a subtle pleasantness throughout. Soft, soothing creamy vanilla finish with hints of confectioners sugar and lightly toasted marshmallow. This is a pleasant, versatile Irish whiskey to have in your bar to serve neat, on the rocks, or in smart cocktails. 

      		
 
			
 
The decline in the Spanish market has resulted in Cardhu becoming more widely available, which is A Good Thing as far as I am concerned. This is a grassy malt, which at 12 years also has a heightened citric spray of sweet orange zest and a gingery aspect (it’s great with ginger ale). Intense and vibrant with macadamia and a light heathery note, the palate confounds expectations, having a thick chewiness before the grass zings through, adding lift. 
      		
 
			
 
One of two blended whiskies vying to be the official next Great King Street release, this is the peated version and it's gustier than the original, with less citrus and more peat. Indeed, it's impressively full-flavored, with peat in the driving seat and ginger cake, lime, and dark chocolate, biscuits and pepper in the mix. Best of all, unlike far too many Scotch whiskies this year, it doesn't use peat to hide immature spirit. £30
      		
 
			
 
For the past few years, Famous Grouse vintage vatted malt has been produced but not sold here in the U.S. They were in the 10-12 year old age range. This version being introduced to the U.S. is a non-vintage expression, and I don’t think it really matters. What matters is its taste. Major components of The Famous Grouse blended whiskies have included The Macallan and Highland Park, and there’s no doubt these malts are providing some of the richness and flavor complexity in this new expression. The whisky is quite hefty, with notes of juicy fruit, toffee, almonds, heather, and a wisp of vanilla and smoke. It is also very well balanced and quite a bargain for $30. 

-> On page 146 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
I had to double check that price. My feelings are well recorded on premium whiskies bottled at 40% and if you were to ask me whether the whisky's worth the price tag, the answer's no. That doesn't make it a bad whisky, though; far from it. It has a light, dusty, and fruity nose reminiscent of raspberry sherbet, and on the palate there is trademark smoke, and pleasant toffee and treacle. Good, but in stellar company here. (
) Price is per liter.
      		
 
			
 
As a follow up to the Black Bottle 10 year old released to the U.S. a few years back, Burn Stewart is now importing its younger sibling, the standard Black Bottle. The nose and palate confirm the smoky peat that defines Islay. This is a youthful whisky for sure, with a bit of fire in its personality, but there are calming sweet barley notes, along with some vanilla cream to tame the beast. I even pick up some subtle notes of smoked olives, seaweed, and suggestions of espresso on the finish. Because it is a blended whisky, it’s also very drinkable for such an intense whisky. A very good value. 

      		
 
			
 
Delicate, yet nicely balanced. Notes of peaches and cream, meadow flowers, subtle berry fruits, soft vanilla, and light honey. Gentle, pleasing oak finish. Nice dovetailing of flavors and very drinkable. A good example of a lighter-style mature blend, and quite the antithesis of the Johnnie Walker Blue Anniversary bottling reviewed above. A pleasing warm weather scotch, or perhaps before dinner as an aperitif. 

      		
 
			
 
A pleasing, very drinkable bourbon. Elegant notes of butterscotch candy, honey-tinged fruit, creamy vanilla, and sweet corn, with delicate mint on the finish. A versatile bourbon that fits most moods and occasions. (Bottled exclusively for Bayway World of Liquor.) 

      		
 
			
 
Amber color. Aroma of soft fruit, sweet corn, caramel, light toffee, and a hint of mint. Light to medium in body, and smooth. On the palate, notes of caramel coated fruit, corn and delicate toffee notes, becoming gently dry, with notes of vanilla and mint. 

      		
 
			
 
This might the most drinkable Evan Williams Single Barrel vintage ever produced. Its most noticeable personality trait is sweetness (gentle, not cloying), with notes of caramel corn, vanilla custard, candied fruit, and subtle macaroon. Spearmint, cinnamon, nutmeg, and charcoal provide some zest. Soft and clean on the finish, with gentle oak resin. A smooth, easy ride from beginning to end.

      		
 
			
 
A 5 year old rye whisky made in Lawrenceburg, Ind. (with the signature LDI 95% rye mashbill) that went through the Lincoln County Process after aging. A somewhat anemic nose, lightly grassy; sweet with edges of mint, vanilla, and oatmeal. The mouth is more rewarding; the rye’s bitter spice and sweet mint emerge to flame across the tongue. It’s very easy to drink, with a flare of oily mint intensity at the finish. Good, but you expect more from Dickel.
      		
 
			
 
A great value. Fully matured and very civilized. Good enough to drink neat, yet inexpensive enough to use as a mixer. Creamy, silky notes of vanilla, caramel, and honeyed corn, along with citrus and pineapple, with a slight dusting of cocoa powder. Gentle finish. 

      		
 
			
 
A 100% straight rye from Canada. This is curiously similar to (and more affordable than) WhistlePig rye, which is also a 100% rye, 10 year old Canadian whisky, but at a slightly higher 50% ABV. (Neither whiskey identifies its origin.) It oozes spice (mint, cinnamon, hint of nutmeg) balanced by layers of sweetness (honeyed vanilla, caramel), with nutty toffee emerging on the finish.
      		
 
			
 
Whiffs of whole cloves quickly turn to cedar shavings, acetone, menthol horse liniment, corn syrup, and German rye bread. Brighter and fresher than other 100% ryes, but somehow a bit muddied with a grainy, earthy, wet-clay mealiness. Searing spices turn rye drinking into an extreme sport. Leather, peppermint, sweetish rye grain, and firewood gradually emerge. A blistering finish pulls like tannic black tea, while underlying rye grain notes drift along forever.
-> On page 147 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
The whiskey’s formula has been improved, and now consists of a higher percentage of older whiskies (into the high teens) than the original release (which I rated 81). Nicely balanced, with candied fruit, blackberry jam, soft vanilla, kettle corn, and a kiss of mint. Pleasant, unpretentious, and uncomplicated.
      		
 
			
 
This Jefferson’s bourbon spent most of its life (almost four years) on a boat in the ocean. All that rocking and environmental conditioning has this whisky tasting four to five times its age. Yes, there’s plenty of resinous oak and leather, but there are also balancing notes of molasses, treacle, toffee, old demerara rum, and roasted nuts. A peppering of cinnamon, mint, tobacco, and maybe…yes, brine add intrigue.
      		
 
			
 
A thick, heavyweight bourbon. Older doesn’t always taste older, and this 30 year old Jefferson’s tastes younger than its sibling 25 year old. The influence of 30 years in oak is evident with its polished leather, tobacco, and charred oak. However, there’s a surprising sweetness that props up the oak with maple syrup, blackberry jam, cinnamon roll, and vanilla cream. Very even-keeled. Yes, it tastes old, but with redeeming qualities. Dark and mysterious in personality.
      		
 
			
 
Honeyed citrus, vanilla, and hints of toasted coconut on the nose.  Similar follow-through on the palate—sweeter up front and then becoming dry with firm spice and toasted nuts. Long, resinous, warm spice finish.  I’d like a little less dried spice on the finish—or more sweetness to balance it. Otherwise, a nice bourbon.
      		
 
			
 
This whiskey’s signature over the last several years has been wood dominant, with plenty of dried spice (the exception being the 2013 release which I really enjoyed—it was chock full of balancing sweetness). The 2014 release is similar to the pre-2013 releases, with dried spice (cinnamon, vanilla) and dried citrus on a soft bed of maple syrup, caramel, and honey, leading to resinous oak grip on the finish. A dynamic bourbon, but still leaning heavily on the oak spice.
      		
 
			
 
The first release in the “Whiskey Row” series. Nicely balanced flavors with a youthful kick. Fairly straightforward in profile, with plenty of spice (cinnamon, clove, mint, and nutmeg), citrus fruit (orange, tangerine, grapefruit), and honey vanilla. Dry, spicy finish. A little rough around the edges, but otherwise an enjoyable whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Ardmore whiskies I’ve enjoyed in the past have been soothingly malty. Many have also been recognizably smoky, which is rare for a Speyside whisky. This one, aged in a first fill bourbon barrel, is true to its roots. It is a clean whisky, with a creamy, soothing maltiness throughout. The palate is entertained by notes of vanilla and honey, with anise, white pepper and a teasing smokiness. The thick maltiness and soft smokiness linger long on the finish. A very underrated whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Predominantly fruity -- the sherry cask is obvious, but it’s not heavy or dominant. Clean, bright orchard fruit blends in nicely with strawberry rhubarb pie, light toffee, dates, dark chocolate, and polished oak. Long, soothing, oily finish. Another solid effort from this young distillery.
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in February 2000 and matured in a single refill hogshead, this example of Arran is part of the Provenance range which highlights the season of distillation on the bottle label. Malt, salt, milk chocolate, vanilla, and developing citrus notes on the fragrant nose. Quite full in the mouth, fruity and zesty, with a hint of grist. Long and softly spiced in the finish, with almonds and a final suggestion of aniseed. £40
      		
 
			
 
Isle of Arran Distillers has introduced a second edition of its Orkney Bere expression, made with an ancient variety of barley still cultivated in the Orkney Islands and aged in bourbon barrels. It is a cask strength 10 year old variant, and 4,890 bottles are available. The nose is quite oily, with ripe peaches and pineapple cubes, plus developing floral notes. Viscous and sweet on the palate, with tangerines, caramel, and rich spices. The finish is lengthy, with coconut and milk chocolate-coated caramel.
-> On page 148 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Style: Lowland single malt scotch Color: Antique Gold Aroma: Dry but creamy, with notes of vanilla, marshmallow, honey, and tropical fruit (pineapple, coconut). Palate: Malty and creamy up front, with vanilla, marshmallow, and a hint of honey; briefly becoming fruity (again, the tropical fruits) before turning dry and oaky, with a big, long, dry finish (especially for a triple-distilled Lowlander). 

   General Comments: As I have written in the past, Lowland whiskies are known for maturing nicely at a younger age. But most people don't know that some (especially Auchentoshan) are delicious at older ages too. As mentioned in my 'From the Stills' column, older vintages of Auchentoshan are now only being offered to individual retailers, one cask at a time, and this is one of those casks. It is one of many 1966 vintage Auchentoshan whiskies I have enjoyed over the past 15 years. Auchentoshan, from a balance and complexity perspective, seems to be best in the 20-30 year old range. Still, having said this, this one holds up fairly well for its age. Price: approx. $150. Available exclusively at Park Avenue Liquors.
      		
 
			
 
This 1998 vintage triple distilled Lowland Auchentoshan has been matured in fino sherry casks, which are rarely used for Scotch whisky maturation. The nose presents violets in fresh soil, honey, spice, developing citric fruit notes, and almonds. Quite full-bodied, fruity and zesty in the mouth. Lengthy in the finish, with spice, nuts, and oak. Becoming dry and gingery at the last. 
      		
 
			
 
Auchentoshan Valinch is essentially a cask strength version of the popular Classic expression. It is named after the metal tube used to extract samples of spirit from the cask. A nose of tinned peaches in syrup, Madeira, cinnamon, newly-planed wood, coconut, and vanilla notes. Sweet and spicy on the creamy palate, with vanilla, honey, and praline. Oak and spice in the peach liqueur-like finish.
      		
 
			
 
Part of Auchentoshan’s new travel retail line-up, Springwood carries no age statement, contains younger whiskies than Heartwood, and has been matured in 100 percent ex-bourbon wood. Acetone, tinned peaches in vanilla, and whipped cream on the floral nose. The palate is clean and fruity, initially citric, with emerging apricots in honey, and fresh spices. More spice in the finish, with focuses on milk chocolate, cinnamon, and a suggestion of Madeira.  €42
      		
 
			
 
This is the second edition of Auchentoshan’s cask strength Valinch bottling, which carries no age statement and has been matured in first-fill bourbon casks. As with the previous Valinch expression, only 2,000 cases have been released globally. Very fragrant on the nose, with pears, applesauce, and vanilla fudge. Spice, cream, and lively Jaffa oranges on the palate. A touch of (not unpleasant) new make spirit comes through in the relatively lengthy finish.
      		
 
			
 
Batch 2 runs to 295 bottles and, in common with the rest of the range, carries no age statement. Peaches in brandy, ginger, honey, and milk chocolate on the pleasingly floral nose. The palate is silky, with more floral notes, plus cedar, oak, and soft spices. Almonds and allspice in the medium length finish. £63/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
Here’s the older sibling to the 1997 vintage released in U.S. at the same time. It costs twice as much as the 1997 vintage, and guess what? I like the less expensive 1997 vintage better (because of its lovely balance and creamy texture). Still, this 1991 vintage is a nice whisky, rich with vanilla, coconut cream, citrus (orange, tangerine), pineapple, and sultana. A soothing, mouth-coating texture lingers, with some polished oak on the finish. 
      		
 
			
 
The newest release in Balvenie’s limited edition range, and the first venture back into smoke since the “Islay Cask” limited release several years ago. Some of this whisky was finished in a peated cask, some in new American oak. Both influences emerge with the smoke (jerky with a hint of kippers) and spice (cinnamon, vanilla, nutmeg) on a foundation of honeyed malt. Spicy, smoky finish. Balvenie is one of those big Speyside whiskies that can stand up to the smoke. This one will not appeal to everyone, but it makes for an interesting diversion. 
      		
 
			
 
An attempt to replicate the spirit produced at Ben Nevis in 1882. The malt is peated to around 30 ppm, and a first edition of 700 bottles with no age statement has been released. Initial starch on the nose, then buttery smoked haddock, a hint of chili, sherry, and gentle wood smoke. Full-bodied, spicy on the palate, with hazelnuts and peat. Stewed fruit and lingering spicy cigarette ash in the finish. £60
      		
 
			
 
Sounds more like a disease than a whisky. A peated version of BenRiach, with the tarry smoke melding nicely with toffee, bramble, and rhubarb. Lingering earthy smoke on the finish and slightly tannic, with subtle fruit. Good mouthfeel on this one.

-> On page 149 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
(Exclusive to Park Ave Liquors, New York, NY) A rich, clean, bright whisky, with aromas of honey, marshmallow, vanilla, and a mélange of fruit (orange, peaches, lemon, pineapple). Creamy in texture and richly flavored without being heavy or cloying. The various fruit notes dance on the palate and add complexity to the sweetness. Long, soothing finish. Great after dinner-given its considerable weight, but lively enough to have before dinner. 

      		
 
			
 
This one stands out from the other three because of its port wood finishing. Dark amber/ruby color. You’ll discover lush fruit and a rich nuttiness on top of the typical flavors expressed in the 18 year old. Additional layers of intense spice and oak notes balance the whisky’s sweetness and fruit. The heartiest of the bunch. 

      		
 
			
 
Following on from the official 8 year old release of Bladnoch, distilled and matured under the current Raymond Armstrong regime, comes a 9 year old variant in the familiar distillery label series. It offers a spring-like nose of cereal, freshly-squeezed lemon juice, meadow flowers, and a hint of milky coffee. Spicy toffee, apples, honey, and ginger on the palate, which finishes with a floral note, lemon, apples, and lively oak. £40
      		
 
			
 
This 12 year old example of Diageo’s Perthshire single malt has been matured in a sherry butt and features milk chocolate, malt, and digestive biscuits on the nose; becoming fruitier, notably with lemon curd. The palate is rich, sweet, and spicy, with barley, honey, and white grapes. Vanilla and spicy orange marmalade in the medium-length finish. £40
      		
 
			
 
Every once in a while you get whisky where the palate is completely different than the nose. This is one of those whiskies. Aged in bourbon casks and 37 years old, its aroma expresses tropical fruits (similar to other older Bowmores), with papaya, lemon, mango, strawberry, coconut, and banana. This is balanced by vanilla, crème brûlée, honey, and just a wisp of smoke. Bowmore’s Islay roots are more expressive on the palate, which starts off sweet and slightly oily, quickly evolving to tropical fruit, damp oak, and then leafy smoke through to the finish. The sweetness emerges again towards the finish, with subtle brine and seaweed. (120 bottles for the U.S.) 

      		
 
			
 
Amber color. Complex, exotic aromas of vanilla fudge, coconut, white chocolate, plum, cherry, citrus, and a hint of smoke and bourbon. Light to medium in body and delicate. On the palate, there’s a brief encounter of caramel and fruits mentioned above. After that, most of the flavors come from the wood-dry vanilla, mint, layered spicy oak notes, with some smoke emerging from time to time. Dry, oaky finish. 

Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: approx. $1,500. Available at specialty retailers nationwide May 2003.
I am in love with the aroma-it’s so exotic and intriguing. I would pay just to smell this whisky. But the flavors on the palate are less exotic and more influenced by the wood.
      		
 
			
 
review required 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in a sherry cask, and the lush fruity notes add dimension and richness without masking the whisky’s other flavors. Its flavors are reminiscent of crumbled peat thrown over a campfire; damp earth, anise, and floral notes throughout, dovetailing with the lush sherried fruit. Smoky, briny finish. A well-rounded dram. 

      		
 
			
 
This is quite a saline Bowmore, but there is sufficient sliced apple, cut flowers, and fragrant smoke to give some degree of complexity to the nose. With water you get crisp oak, roasted barley, a hint of nectarine, bison grass, and wet reeds. Starting lean in the mouth, it darkens slightly into brambles and a dusty smokiness before picking up a citric tang on the finish. Slightly muted, but well balanced. £60/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
Quite fresh for 24 years old. Invigorating notes of brine, spice (especially pepper and mustard seed), tropical fruit, and vanilla malt, and an appetizing, lingering brine finish. Well-rounded, and a nice balance between youthful zing and maturity. My only wish is to see this bottled at a higher strength and not chill-filtered 

-> On page 150 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
An interesting nose that’s somewhat akin to a peach cheesecake with slightly burnt pastry, or a heavily caramelized crème brûlée. Overt smoke is in check when neat. In the mouth, however, it comes through massively, mossy and oily and sitting on top of those fat fruits and sweet malt. Thicker and more farmyard-like than Port Charlotte. Great potential, with a sweetness that shows it’s pretty much there. £150
      		
 
			
 
Also distilled in 2009, this is mid-gold in color and medium weight, with a mass of sage-like smoke. More cask influence than 7.1, with smoked coconut, and again a mix of sweet fruits and lemon behind this smoky lead. Oily and rich, but a little fragmented on the tongue; the elements are beginning to cohere to produce integrated complexity. Octomore in mellow mood, with smoked chestnut and a little farmyardy Pinot note. Another positive work in progress report. £125
      		
 
			
 
More mature peated Bunnahabhain Islay whiskies are emerging (like this one). Indeed, tarry, peat ash notes are evident throughout this one (especially on the finish!), along with nutty toffee, nougat, smoked olive, glazed ginger, and candied lime. Pretty even-keeled, not as medicinal and aggressive as its cousins on the southern end of the island. The smoke and layered sweet notes balance nicely. If you’re looking to ease your way into smoky Islay whiskies, this would be a good start. 
      		
 
			
 
Pale gold, with nettles and green apple on the nose alongside almond, light bread crust, and freshly-baked sponge cake. In time, there’s Starburst sweets. Some heat, even at this relatively low strength. There are mineral accents and, with water, the signature ginger. The palate is very sweet and soft with jelly fruits. Clean and supple, especially with water. Zesty, with a refreshing acidic balance.
      		
 
			
 
This is master blender Ian MacMillan’s interpretation of what Bunna’ would have tasted like when the distillery was founded in 1881. There’s light smoke, coming across like smoked halibut, a mineral edge, white fruits, and a freshness like a freshly starched shirt. Water brings out almond. On the palate, the smoke offers a slightly peppery, almost Talisker-esque kick. Light lemon and sweet fruits in the center. Though there’s no age statement, none of the whiskies are under 10 years. £46
      		
 
			
 
An unusual Caol Ila, in that it was finished in a rum cask. The rum influence is subtle - which I like - and it offers a new dimension to the whisky without blunting that Caol Ila character we have come to either love or (for some of you) despise. Olives, seaweed, fire smoke, salt and pepper notes are wrapped up nicely in a malty/caramel blanket. Peppery, smoky finish that lingers on like the embers of an all-night bonfire. 

      		
 
			
 
Caol Ila enthusiasts will be familiar with the tarry rope, seaweed, brine, and white pepper. All this is underpinned nicely by soft, sweeter notes of dark chocolate and vanilla nut truffle. Subtle underlying juniper, horehound, and mint adds intrigue. Nice oily texture with a pleasing dry finish. Time has tempered this Caol Ila, but it has aged gracefully. 

      		
 
			
 
Light to medium in body (and quite pale in color), but quite invigorating. A flirtatious vanilla sweetness at the front of the palate quickly evolves into spicy, peppery, grassy notes. The whisky evolves further, expressing notes of smoke, tar, chewy seaweed, brine, feint green tea and olives. A persistent, if delicate, honey sweetness hangs on throughout to offer some gentility. Lingering, smoky finish. A raw whisky, but somehow compelling. An excellent value too! (Bottled exclusively for Binny's Beverage Depot.)
      		
 
			
 
An interesting contrast to the Signatory bottling reviewed above. While expressing a similar fundamental flavor profile, this one is a more polished affair and not as daring. It is fuller in body, nicely rounded, and expresses a sweeter foundation (less honey, more toffee and caramel). 

      		
 
			
 
Sweet, viscous, and weighty; much more so than its sister whisky (reviewed above) that was finished in Madeira casks. But the same Caol Ila DNA is here — tar, olive brine, pepper — along with fleshy red fruit and chocolate. Lingering ripe fruit and tar on the finish. Save this one for after dinner, or with a book at bedtime.
-> On page 151 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
This 1992 vintage from Clynelish distillery is part of Diageo’s Distillers Edition range of ‘finished’ single malts, and it underwent a secondary period of maturation in oloroso seco casks prior to bottling. Sweet sherry, honey, and oranges on the nose, with a gentle note of rum and cloves. The palate initially offers vibrant sherry, sultana, and hazelnuts, with developing cloves, angelica, and spices. The finish is medium in length, with a mild note of enduring ginger. £45 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Ahh, Clynelish. The enigma of the northeast coast. A single malt whose waxy character — and it does smell of snuffed candles — is highly prized by blenders. This is a palate whisky, the nose almost shy and muted: glints of citrus and jellied fruits, notes of ozone/spiciness and stem ginger. It’s on the tongue that it comes into its own: clinging, strangely savory, lightly sweet, juicily fruity. Enigmatic indeed.
      		
 
			
 
Bright gold/straw color. Lively aroma of honey-drenched fruit (pineapple, red currant, citrus) with a rich malty foundation. Subtle floral notes in the background. Medium in body, but thick, almost mouth-coating in texture (a classic Dallas Dhu signature). Clean flavors on the palate-honey, interwoven fruit, vanilla, with a dry "polished oak" finish. 

      		
 
			
 
The Spey Dram is made up of 36 percent whisky matured in ex-oloroso casks and 64 percent from American oak. The nose offers fresh oranges, brittle toffee, cream, and ginger. The nutty palate reveals fresh fruits, and is significantly spicier than the other Rivers expressions, with ginger and even chili notes. The finish is long and notably spicy, with less chocolate than in the three other Rivers variants, ending with a touch of treacle. £42 Currently not available in the U.S. 
      		
 
			
 
This 1980 expression of The Dalmore Constellation has been solely matured in a Gonzales Byass Apostoles oloroso sherry butt. The resultant whisky is sweet on the nose, with dates, figs, milk chocolate-covered caramel, and finally a suggestion of eucalyptus. Briefly fruity on the palate, becoming bitter, with dark coffee notes. Long and spicy in the finish, with black pepper and licorice. Cask number 2140; 227 bottles. 
      		
 
			
 
Distilled on June 20, 1999 and bottled in November 2013, this expression from the Perthshire distillery of Edradour was matured for 14 years in a sherry butt. The outturn was 687 bottles. The nose is notably sweet, with jammy aromas —strawberry and raspberry— while hazelnuts and walnuts lurk in the background. The same fruit and nut notes from the nose carry over, along with sultanas, candied peel, Jaffa orange, and spicy leather. The lengthy finish is viscous and gingery. £70
      		
 
			
 
Style: Speyside single malt scotch Color: Deep gold Aroma: Mature. Plenty of oak, but it’s clean. Coconut and citrus fruit. Background spices. Palate: Lovely balance and restrained woodiness for such an old whisky-the wood really doesn’t emerge until the end. Citrus and coconut up front wrapped in a blanket of malt, becoming dry and spicy, but not excessively so. Delicate, lingering oak finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Thicker and fruitier than the entry level 10 year old, with greater mouthfeel and a drier finish. Orchard fruit (especially pear), kiwi, lime, and creamy vanilla, with suggestions of toasted coconut, hay, and marshmallow. Dry, gently spicy finish. A bit more involved than the 10 year old, but still with the same DNA. Very pleasant.

      		
 
			
 
Glenisla was an experiment by the parent company-who only owned Speyside distilleries-to produce a smoky, "Islay-style" whisky at Glen Keith. It is quite smoky, but without the coastal characteristics (brine, seaweed). Instead, it displays notes of ripe barley, ginger, lemon peel, and licorice stick along with all that peat smoke. A rather straight-forward, uncomplicated, yet very pleasant smoky whisky. If only all the Speyside distilleries did this 30 years ago. 

      		
 
			
 
Lemonade, hints of aniseed, and putty on the nose. Tropical fruits, spice, and milk chocolate on the palate. The finish is medium in length and spicy, with a hint of licorice. 
-> On page 152 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Nougat and a suggestion of fresh newsprint on the nose. Quite full-bodied, with a palate of mixed nuts and peaches in brandy. The finish is slightly waxy, with fruit and nut chocolate. 
      		
 
			
 
Nice malty foundation and soothingly creamy, with sweet notes (sticky toffee pudding, vanilla cream, caramel custard) integrating well with dry oak spice and fruit (peaches, blueberry, and currants).l Very easy-going and friendly. A very nice Glencadam and reasonably priced for its age. 

      		
 
			
 
When I toured Glenfarclas in May 2008, George Grant told me that, while it is usually not their policy to stray from aging their whisky in sherry and bourbon oak casks, they have done some experimenting. One of these experiments, aged entirely in a port cask, has finally been bottled. The nice thing about Glenfarclas is that it is a rich spirit and can stand up to a good dose of port wine (or sherry for that matter). The port notes are lush, with ripe fruit (plum, red grape skin, caramelized apricot, prune) and dates complementing the whisky’s malty, maple syrup foundation. The 27 years also impart a good dose of polished oak for balance. Not as complex as other Glenfarclas whiskies of this age, but this is certainly a solid, enjoyable change of pace for Glenfarclas. (A Park Avenue Liquor exclusive.)

      		
 
			
 
(A Park Avenue Liquors exclusive). Shimmering gold color. Lovely creamy texture. This creaminess comes through in its flavors too, binding to notes of vanilla, malt, shortbread, and delicate honey. Floral notes, citrus, red currants, and a wisp of peat provide contrast. An enjoyable, nicely polished dram from a distillery whose whisky is underappreciated-especially the older expressions. 

      		
 
			
 
The latest release from Glen Garioch is a limited edition 1994 vintage, produced when the distillery still boasted working floor maltings, and is therefore more peaty than spirit subsequently distilled. Pear drops, vanilla, and developing caramel on the nose. Freshly-opened cigarette packets, and, in time, brown paper and vinegar. Quite dry and austere on the palate, with stem ginger and subtle smoke. Persistently spicy in the medium-length finish, with an elusive late flurry of smoky, chocolate caramel. 
      		
 
			
 
The first Glen Garioch vintage to be exclusive to Travel Retail outlets and also the only one so far to post-date the closure of  their on-site floor maltings. This leads to a less peaty note in the spirit than in other vintages. Matured in first and second-fill bourbon casks. Tinned peaches in syrup and nougat on the nose. Sweet malt, heather honey, vanilla, restrained cinnamon, nutmeg, and ginger on the palate. Subtle oak notes in the lengthy finish. £50
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in September 1995 and matured for 17 years in a refill hogshead, this bottling of the Aberdeenshire malt Glen Garioch
offers a nose of fresh peaches and vanilla, followed by a sprinkling of chili powder, and even a suggestion of boiled ham. Voluptuous in the mouth, with summer fruits, toffee apples, and a significant amount of ginger. The finish
dries quite rapidly, with fruity spices. £60
      		
 
			
 
The Aberdeenshire distillery of Glen Garioch has released its first ever virgin oak-matured expression, which has employed heavily charred American oak barrels. According to master blender Rachel Barrie, “Glen Garioch’s intense flavor means it holds up well in a new fill cask.” Ripe peaches on the nose, spicy oak, vanilla, and more soft, floral notes in time. Malt, milk chocolate, nectarines, nougat, and mild cloves on the palate, while the finish is medium in length, with ginger and lively oak.
      		
 
			
 
A 15 year malt selected by the Loch & K(e)y Society. Hard apple cider leads the nose and is backed by honeyed malt and cinnamon-baked pear. The entry is lush caramel apple, but quickly transitions as the sheer power and spice of the mid-palate comes crashing in with oak, ginger, and pine. The finish is long, dry, and spicy with lingering heat. This is the kind of big, bold, dry whisky that American whiskey drinkers might enjoy. (
)
      		
 
			
 
 is apparently Old Norse for “turf” or “peat,” and this no age statement Glenglassaugh was made using malt peated to around 20 ppm phenols. Heathery peatiness on the early nose, with dried fruits, malt, and cream soda. Ultimately, leathery, mellow smoke. Sweet and lively on the palate, after an initial flavor of coal soot, with ripe peaches, chili, and ginger, backed by floral peat and a hint of ozone. Spicy peat smoke in the relatively long and fruity finish. £40
-> On page 153 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Deep gold color. Aromas of creamy vanilla, herbs, wood spice, and subtle fruit. Light and creamy in body. On the palate, this whisky starts out clean and sweet, with notes of vanilla and honey. It then turns dry with spicy, herbal, soft fruity notes, finishing on the dry side. 

      		
 
			
 
Glengoyne’s entry-level 10 year old is the most readily available of their malts, and is made using entirely unpeated malt. The producers claim this helps to preserve “the essence of its flavor.” Fresh and well-rounded on the nose, with medium sweet aromas suggesting malt, oak, and a hint of sherry. Smooth and delicate on the palate, it is slightly oaky, with a suggestion of cooking apples. The finish is pleasingly long, with buttery, vanilla notes, slowly drying. 
      		
 
			
 
Named in honor of the copper teapot from which distillery workers were ‘drammed’ until the 1970s, this distillery-exclusive bottling has been matured in first-fill 
 sherry casks for an unspecified period. The nose is fruity and fragrant, with profound spicy sherry notes. Mouth-coating, with lots more sherry, plus prunes, drinking chocolate, and a little oak. Lingering in the finish, with drying sherry, light spice, and dark chocolate. A great dram for lovers of a true sherry monster! £60
      		
 
			
 
A quintet of releases showing examples of The Glenlivet from five decades, issued to support The Glenlivet Generations 70 year old bottling. All are available individually or in a limited edition set (50 only) for £2,850; these bottlings are not currently available in the U.S.

This is from a first fill American oak hoggie, and the extra time in cask has given it a classic mature Glenlivet character: a rich, complex mix of cooked apple, pine, and citrus, cut with rose petal. The fruitiness has moved from pear into baked apricot. Water adds an almond note. The scented notes have been retained (especially on the finish), but have deepened into sweet spice. The oak gives light grip. Have with chilled water on the side. £250 
      		
 
			
 
As with the ‘Fiddich (reviewed in this issue), here’s a malt where an improved wood policy has brought a dram to life and added complexity. The Glenlivet has always been about lightness, but the trick is to have sufficient solid base to allow its flower to blossom, so as well as lily, orchid, and pineapple, there’s a thick creaminess that gently beds all of these flighty flavors down. With water, there’s mandarin and rose petal, and a sneeze of white pepper. Simply lovely. Value Pick
      		
 
			
 
A very fragrant, fruity whisky (orange, tangerine, plum, nectarine) with interwoven notes of honeyed malt, toasted oak, vanilla, and subtle anise. I love the creamy, mouth-coating texture of this whisky and its soothing finish. All the vintages of Glenrothes that have been released over the years are worthy of your hard-earned money, and this one is no exception. There's not as much depth as some of the older, more mature expressions, but the lively youthfulness of this whisky makes up for it.
      		
 
			
 
This 1984 Vintage is similar in profile to its older 1972 Vintage sibling (reviewed above), except that the 1972 Vintage expresses greater depth and has more oak to balance the sweetness (the sherry notes get a bit sappy in this 1984 expression). The 1972 Vintage also evolves more on the palate, and it is more intriguing. But don't let this keep you from trying this 1984 Vintage expression. It is still a very enjoyable whisky (and more economically priced).
      		
 
			
 
One thing I enjoy about these vintage releases are the differences in personality from one vintage to the next. This 1998 vintage follows shortly after the 1994, and while that one was elegant and bright in personality, this 1998 is more viscous and heavier in weight. It shows bright fruit (lemon, caramelized pineapple, tangerine), honeyed vanilla, and marzipan with a peppering of cinnamon and ginger. Perhaps the 1994 as an aperitif, and the 1998 a digestif? The 1998 is not nearly as post-prandial as, say, the 1972 vintage, but it has more weight than the 1994 vintage. Still, if I had to choose between the 1994 and 1998, my nod goes to the 1994 for its elegance and drinkability.
      		
 
			
 
Bold, with a slightly blunt entrance. The cask influence is to the fore, mixing rum and raisin with a slight yeasty/dough-like edge that sits alongside caramelized fruits. In time, there’s sweet draff, malt loaf (with butter), and the smell of old cupboards. It gets creamier with water. Medium-bodied with a light savory note in the middle that then drifts toward Brazil nut, and Assam tea. A solid performer. Bristol Milk sherry rather than old 
. £55
      		
 
			
 
This 10 year old expression from the Perthshire distillery of Glenturret has replaced the 12 year old. Glenturret is at the heart of The Famous Grouse blend, and the distillery was re-branded as ‘The Famous Grouse Experience’ in 2002. Nutty and slightly oily on the nose, with barley and citrus fruits. Sweet and honeyed on the full, fruity palate, with a balancing note of oak. Medium length in the sweet finish. £31 (Not available in the U.S.)
-> On page 154 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in September 1994 and bottled at 18 years of age as part of Douglas Laing’s Old Malt Cask series, this Perthshire single malt displays a nose of malt loaf, tinned prunes, white pepper, and a suggestion of soy sauce on the nose. Finally, much more floral. Peppery on the palate, with citrus fruit, gunpowder tea, medium sherry, and cocoa powder. The powdery cocoa notes persist in the long, spicy, discreetly oaky finish.  £80
      		
 
			
 
With only a 10 year old house bottling of Glenturret available, brand owners the Edrington Group have collaborated with independent bottler Hunter Laing to produce this ‘semi-official’ 26 year old expression, matured entirely in refill bourbon casks. Pineapple, dates, honey, and hard toffee on the floral nose. Full-bodied, waxy and chewy on the palate, with vanilla, ginger, cherry liqueur chocolates, and dark spices. Lengthy in the finish, with emerging bitter chocolate notes. £300
      		
 
			
 
Aged initially in a refill sherry cask, and then in port casks. Layers of lush fruit (red raspberry, strawberry, currant, rhubarb, and ripe peach) with underlying toffee and pot still rum adding body and texture. Peat and brine peek through intermittently, particularly on the finish. The whisky is heavy on the fruit, but it is clean and not cloying. A very soothing whisky.

      		
 
			
 
Unlike ‘house’ bottlings of Highland Park, all of which are aged in sherry casks, this expression in Douglas Laing’s Old Malt Cask series has been matured in former bourbon wood. It was distilled in September 1996. Sweet and fruity on the nose, with nougat and peanut butter, plus a slightly herbal note, and finally discreet, sweet peat smoke. Medium-bodied, citric, and spicy, with a little smoke. Smokiness turns to ash in the finish, with citrus fruit and caramel. £70
      		
 
			
 
Pale straw. One of a seemingly never-ending stream of Imperials from Duncan Taylor, all of which show remarkable consistency and are rarely over-wooded, thereby allowing the distillery character to shine. Here are echoes of Loire Sauvignon Blanc — nettles, gooseberry, cut grass, fennel tops, and fresh herbs — with a hint of Imperial’s giveaway American cream soda softness. The palate is as soft as soy milk. Classic Imperial.£38
      		
 
			
 
The name of this limited-edition bottling translates as ‘the lands around the rowan,’ and the component whisky has been matured in three, fresh-run American white oak hogsheads. Tinned peaches, a hint of smoke, and developing cream soda on the nose. Soft toffee and ultimately, chimney soot. The palate is full and fruity, with Brazil nuts, drying quite rapidly, with coriander notes. Dark chocolate and licorice characterize the finish. (500 bottles). £500
      		
 
			
 
Exclusive to the Travel Retail arena, Jura Turas-Mara takes its name from the Gaelic for “long journey.” It has been matured in an array of casks sourced from America, Spain, France, and Portugal. Initially, green apples on the nose, then sweet fruit notes
elly babies
plus coconut and fudge. A little linseed in the background. Vanilla, peaches, mango, and lively spices on the palate. The finish dries, with aniseed balls, becoming slightly powdery. €50
      		
 
			
 
This Jura expression was distilled in 1984 and matured in bourbon casks for 22 years before a further 6 years in Gonzalez Byass Matusalem sherry butts and 2 years in Amoroso and Apostoles 
 sherry casks. The nose opens with beef gravy, soon followed by prunes, cherries, dark chocolate, and PX sherry. Full-bodied, rich and sweet on the palate, with lively spices, and more cherries, and chocolate. Long and fruity in the finish, with spicy sherry and licorice. £750
      		
 
			
 
Brought back as an annual limited edition to satisfy the cravings of those who like their peat full-on and never understood why Lagavulin moved to 16 years of age, this is the Kildalton coast single malt at its most boisterous. Aromatically, it blazes a seaweed-strewn, zigzag pathway between sea, shore, and land: bog myrtle and samphire, beach bonfire, sea spray, and melon before, with much-needed water, there’s slow-burning Latakia pipe tobacco and Lapsang Souchong tea. 
      		
 
			
 
This is usually a bracing expression of Lagavulin and this year’s release doesn’t disappoint—smoldering peat, ozone freshness, but with greater sweetness than in 2011, though water shows how it is still just a little gawky. The palate is, yes, smoky, but there’s also light cereal, praline, violets, and seashore aromas aplenty. Fills the mouth with intensity. Okay, it’s edgy, but that’s what you expect.  
-> On page 155 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
This is a venerable Lagavulin which immediately shows its age with a nose that mixes the savory (hoisin sauce) with the mature notes of dunnage warehouse, sandalwood, and a minty lift. In time, there’s bog myrtle, old attics, rain-moistened wool, and a smokiness akin to a dead briar pipe. Slightly dull to start, it perks up in the mid-palate with lanolin and black olive brine, and a Darjeeling-like grippiness. Interesting for sure, but past its best. 
.
      		
 
			
 
Hard not to compare this to the 12 year old, as they are of similar strength and character. This is more about the peat bank rather than the shore, more eucalyptus than kelp. This pungent, earthy note is retained with water, alongside some brine. The palate is like carrageen moss pudding, with a touch of nutmeg at the end. Plenty there, but it all moves very quickly when I want it to linger. That said, a solid performer. £47/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
A very laid-back start with the sweetness of the sherry cask bringing a fat, figgy, dried fruit aroma which initially suppresses the peat, only allowing a little pipe smoke and smoked meat to emerge. With water, there’s balsam, tar, dried seaweed, and fabric Band-Aid. This is repeated on the tongue, with dark fruits suddenly changing to spent kiln and bonfire ashes, but there needs to be more cohesion between the elements. £80
      		
 
			
 
A nicely balanced Laphroaig, with a soothing malty sweetness layered in between the smoke, peat, tarry rope, and iodine. Underlying notes of vanilla bean, caramel custard, grist, anise, coconut, blueberry, and a dusting of cocoa add subtle complexity. 

      		
 
			
 
Distilled in May 1993, this bottling is of the Ledaig heavily-peated variant of Tobermory single malt. Aged for 19 years, it was ‘finished’ for 40 months in wine casks from the St-Joseph AOC in northern Rhône. Pickled beetroot, emerging caramel, and distant log-fire embers on the nose. Voluptuous and fruity, notably spicy—pepper and ginger—plus mulled wine notes. Quite lengthy in the finish, with lingering spice. Peatiness is most evident here. 2,200 bottles.  
      		
 
			
 
Online retailer TheWhiskyBarrel.com has released 60 bottles of 21 year old single malt from the now-lost Lowland distillery of Littlemill. Maturation has taken place in a sherry hogshead and cask #35 yielded 306 bottles, with the balance being held by whiskybroker.co.uk. The nose is rich and thick, with old sherry, caramel, and cinnamon, while the full palate boasts aniseed, pipe tobacco, and an effervescence that is unusual in a whisky of this age. The finish is lengthy, with drying sherry notes. 
      		
 
			
 
The first Lowland single malt bottling to be made available in the U.S. by the Creative Whisky Co., this 24 year old cask strength, single cask bottling from the now-demolished Lowland distillery of Littlemill offers toffee, fresh pineapple, and sultanas on the pleasing nose. Voluptuous in the mouth; mellow, with vanilla, cocoa powder, and soft spice notes. Brazil nuts and old oak in the gingery finish. 
      		
 
			
 
This is a distillery bottling from the now-demolished Lowland plant of Littlemill, near Glasgow, and the release consists of 4,550 bottles. There has been no chill filtration. Fresh pineapple and mango on the nose, inflated balloons, a hint of vanilla, and cocoa powder. Medium-bodied, with focused tropical fruits, ginger, and caramel. Lengthy in the finish, with gentle spice and milk chocolate-coated toffee. £130
      		
 
			
 
The stocks of the “new era” Longrow keep getting older (and better). A pleasingly sweet foundation of burnt caramel, vanilla fudge, and toffeed nuts is challenged by earthy peat, tar, damp barnyard, and brine. Earthy, smoky finish. A nice whisky with great potential, but still needs a few more years. 

      		
 
			
 
Longmorn’s signature is a thick mouth-coating, honeyed maltiness, which is almost chewy in texture. While delicious in its teens, its personality lends itself to aging, because its maltiness provides a good counterpoint to the resinous dry oak notes which are usually imparted to older whiskies. This whisky is no exception. Notes of honey, vanilla malt, and subtle fruit dovetail nicely with the dry, resinous, polished leather-like contributions from 29 years in oak. Nice long finish. 

-> On page 156 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Style: Speyside single malt scotch Color: Walnut Aroma: Richly sherried and thick, with notes of nuts and toffee. Wood resins contribute spice and variety. Fruitcake at Christmas. Palate: Thick, chewy in texture, and quite ripe. Again the fruitcake. Very deep and mature with some underlying maltiness. Dry, spicy, oak notes fight off all that sherry and add balance and complexity. Long, soothing finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Speyside single malt scotch Color: Bright gold Aroma: Rose petals, lavender, vanilla, soft fruity esters. Palate: Creamy vanilla and a touch of honey up front, becoming gently fruity with a soft maltiness. Clean, delicately complex finish of polished oak and soft floral notes. 

      		
 
			
 
Straw gold color. Aromas reminiscent of a bouquet of flowers, honey, soft fruit, and vanilla. Light to medium in body but mouth-coating. Honey, flowery fruit gum drop flavors, eventually turning dry and gently spicy, with a polished oak finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Straw gold. Well rounded, with fresh vanilla, berries in cream, caramel custard, toasted oak, and gentle dried spice. A really nice everyday, anytime dram. The best price/quality ratio of the range.  (Price is per 1 litre). 

      		
 
			
 
Light amber. A very clean, mealy, and creamy nose with real sweetness and a belt of vanilla before things settle into the realm of cooked fruits enlivened by masses of peppermint. The oak shows itself as hot sawdust and a little cedar. In the mouth, that sweetness continues to alternate between a prickly feel and sweet fruit syrups, while Macallan’s oily earthiness anchors it both on the tongue and to the distillery. 285 bottles.  
      		
 
			
 
Matured in a bourbon cask. Thick and creamy, with mouth-coating vanilla, ripe barley, toasted marshmallow, vanilla wafer, key lime pie, golden delicious apple, lemongrass, and hay. The vanilla sweetness lingers to the finish, mixing with dried herbs and hay. I was expecting more from a carefully chosen Mortlach, given its pedigree, but this is still nice. (240 bottles) £250
      		
 
			
 
Certainly not the best Mortlach I’ve tasted, but it’s a solid effort and at a good price for a 21 year old. Nicely balanced — Lorne Mackillop’s hallmark — and somewhat reserved, too (for a Mortlach), with intriguing lime, kiwi, caramel, floral notes (on the nose), nutty toffee (especially on the palate), soaked barley, and charcoal, with a rather syrupy, mouth-clinging texture toward the finish. Worth a look.
      		
 
			
 
This expression has been matured entirely in bourbon casks and offers a fresh nose of ozone and lemon, becoming quite fragrant in time. More mouth-coating than might be expected, yet easy drinking, with milk chocolate, malt, tropical fruits, and an edge of sea salt. The finish is medium in length, with wood spices. £40/liter
      		
 
			
 
Just 450 cases of this veteran expression from Old Pulteney have been released, offered in non-chill filtered format after maturation in a mixture of bourbon casks and Spanish oak sherry casks. Light fruit notes on the nose, notably tangerines, plus vanilla, lemon, and sea salt. Orchard fruits, spicy sherry, worn leather, and cocoa powder on the silky palate. Spicy and drying in the finish, with mild oak tannins.
      		
 
			
 
A gentle, pleasant dram. Quite floral, too. Soft, creamy vanilla foundation with a hint of marshmallow. Underlying notes of cut grass and linseed oil add texture and intrigue. Rosebank is a classic Lowlander and, given that the distillery closed in 1993, younger expressions will become more difficult to find (not to mention more expensive). Here’s a good whisky at a fair price. 

-> On page 157 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
The Glasgow-based independent bottler Douglas Laing & Co. Ltd. has been responsible for quite a number of releases from the ‘lost’ Lowland distillery of Rosebank, and this one was distilled during January 1990 and bottled in April 2012. The nose is pleasingly floral and fragrant, light and gently honeyed, with a suggestion of barley in the background. The palate features spicy, sweet orange, herbs, and a slightly contrasting note of citrus fruit. Spices persist into the warming, lightly-oaked finish. £135
      		
 
			
 
A pleasure to drink, just like the 12 year old version that preceded it. A foundation of honeyed malt, with background vanilla, subtle cocoa, faint bourbon, salt, and diffuse spice on the palate. Light to medium in body, but fairly viscous in texture. However, a coastal freshness cuts through the viscosity, keeping the whisky lively. Some of the freshness of the previous 12 year old distillery bottling is sacrificed in exchange for more depth and fullness. It is neither better nor worse for this, just different. 

      		
 
			
 
A soft, easy-going whisky with a foundation of honeyed vanilla, caramel custard, and mouth-coating maltiness. Floral and brine notes are sprinkled throughout, as are cocoa, white pepper, and subtle edible seaweed. Soft malt and brine finish. A whisky with a gentler personality when compared to most other island malts, making it a nice introduction to the style. I would, however, like to see this whisky bottled at a higher strength and not chill-filtered. I’d be more than willing to sacrifice some drinkability for greater intensity and more subtle nuances. Still, it is an enjoyable whisky, and enthusiasts of its predecessor -- Scapa 14 -- should also like it, albeit at a higher retail price.
      		
 
			
 
Pale in color, with a gold/green tinge. Exotic fruit (papaya, coconut, kiwi) with gentle sweet notes (vanilla, honey, pancake syrup, marshmallow), spiced with fresh, appetizing brine and anise. The brine lingers on the finish, as do some molasses toffee notes. Dynamic and well-rounded. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in a re-charred sherry cask. Moderately rich and sweet on the nose and palate, but clean and not heavy. Light toffee, nougat, Brazil nuts, vanilla fudge, and honey-laced citrus fruit and golden raisin. Subtle brine accents throughout, with a soothing finish. (Bottled for Park Avenue Liquors.) 

      		
 
			
 
There are still some casks of 1960s Springbank surfacing (even if most are from the independent bottlers). This one is a lighter, more delicate example of the genre. Exotic notes of tropical fruit, citrus, vanilla, linseed, and honey combine with a gentle, fresh brine tang and some background dried spice. The flavors are slightly muted, but this is not surprising given its age. (A Park Avenue Liquors Exclusive.) 

      		
 
			
 
Named after a mythical hellhound that is said to stalk the area around Tomatin distillery, Cù Bòcan is lightly peated and matured in a combination of virgin oak, bourbon, and sherry casks. Just 60,000 liters are produced each year. Lemonade and coconut on the early nose, with developing almonds. Slightly earthy, with soft smoke. Rich, full mouthfeel, malt and honey, with the smoke more evident now, plus cinnamon and cloves. Nutty. Lingering oak and dry peat smoke in the finish.
      		
 
			
 
The nose opens with savory notes. Richer, more fragrant and profound sherry than is present in the Fino or Manazanilla expressions. Full-bodied, with big, musty sherry notes and Seville oranges on the palate, plus lots of spice. Gum-tingling spices, with sultanas and dates in the finish.
      		
 
			
 
This whisky starts with the light and very drinkable bourbon oak-aged 1993 vintage from previous years and then is finished off in a sherry cask. The sherry is fresh and vibrant, and adds lush fruit, light dates, and nutty undertone to Tullibardine’s classic vanilla, honeyed malt, and grassy notes. Delicious!

      		
 
			
 
Similar in personality to its younger standard 1993 and 1992 vintages -- soft and mellow, with fresh barley, vanilla cream puff, cut grass and hay, cookie dough, and a dusting of pencil shavings. The extra aging shows on the whisky’s dried spice and polished oak finish. More sophisticated than its younger siblings, although the younger vintages are more drinkable.
-> On page 158 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Tullibardine Aged Oak Edition carries no age statement, though it contains a blend of whisky more than 15 years old and spirit produced since the distillery reopened in 2003. It has been matured in former bourbon barrels. The nose exhibits barley, citrus fruits, pear drops, crystallized ginger, marzipan, and cocoa. Oily in the mouth and slightly earthy, with brazil nuts and developing vanilla fudge and lemon on the palate. Fruitiness persists through the spicy finish. 
      		
 
			
 
The oldest expression in the Tullibardine lineup provides malt, cedar, stewed apples, and wood shavings on the nose. Mouth-coating, with orange and cocoa powder. Dries quite steadily, with oak lurking behind ripe bananas in the lengthy finish. Another very accomplished old Tullibardine, but the notably pleasing palate of the 20 year old just gives that bottling the edge. 
      		
 
			
 
Richer, thicker, and more lush than the 1975 vintage reviewed here. Fallen orchard fruit, sticky toffee pudding, and nuts, with underlying suggestions of date cake. Emerging dried spice and oak resin towards the finish. A good contrast to the 1975 vintage.
      		
 
			
 
A rare bottling indeed, from this now defunct grain distillery. Very tropical, with a macaroon and vanilla cream foundation. Complementary notes of marshmallow, crème brulee, honey, and pineapple. Surprisingly vibrant for a 43 year old whisky and, while expressing sweeter notes, not at all cloying (the grain whisky aspects actually help here). Soothing and distinctive. Great price, too!
      		
 
			
 
Early bottlings of Mackmyra were a challenge — salty peat, intense woodiness, and unusual juniper-influenced spices made the whisky an acquired taste. Over time though, sweet fruit brought more balance and the whiskies have bloomed. This special bottling — one of four in the Moments series — recalls those roots but delivers a meaty, spicy, and earthy flavor with melt in the mouth syrup. Imagine honey poured on a heavily peppered well-done steak. €141 (Currently not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Consists of two whiskies: half 10 year old Clynelish (finished in Chateau Lafite casks) and half 10 year old Ben Nevis (finished in Grenache Blanc casks). The classic chewy, nutty toffee notes of Ben Nevis are prominent throughout, while Clynelish’s spicy, briny notes become more prominent mid-palate, peaking on the finish. The two work well together, with the brine and spice cutting through the thick toffee. Bright, berried fruit (from the finishing) adds an additional dimension prominently throughout. Some oak resin kicks in on the finish to keep the whisky from becoming too sappy sweet.
      		
 
			
 
This “double malt” contains 70% 12 year old Dufftown (finished in a Zinfandel cask) and 30% 15 year old Mortlach (finished in a Callejo cask). This is a rich, fruity, gripping, broad-shouldered Speyside whisky. Richly sherried, with thick, layered sweetness as a foundation (honey, caramel, light toffee), along with ripe bramble, golden raisin, and pit fruit. Leather, tobacco-tinged, oak tannin finish.
      		
 
			
 
Not overly challenging. Stylish and very easy to embrace. I would introduce a new bourbon drinker to this kind of bourbon. Pleasingly sweet, with honeyed vanilla, graham cracker, candy corn, dates, and golden raisin. Subtle spice (cinnamon, mint, cocoa, and nutmeg), leading to a smooth, silky finish. I would love to see this at 45% ABV or even higher, as it comes across almost too soft. But for this price, I’m not complaining. A great value. 

      		
 
			
 
Produced at Tullibardine distillery in 1989, this ex-bourbon hogshead has yielded 299 bottles. The expression lives up to its name with rum and raisin ice cream on the nose; floral, with glacé cherries, dried apricots, and pistachio nuts. More nuts and lots of spice on the palate, plus dark chocolate, dates, and prunes. The finish is medium in length, with spicy, benign oak. £85
      		
 
			
 
One of the latest single cask bottlings (354 bottles) from Wemyss Malts specifically for the U.S., “A Day at the Coast” was sourced from the East Sutherland distillery of Clynelish. Ozone, warm sand, and wild grasses on the nose, plus a hint of honey, grated ginger, and a freshly-opened box of milk chocolates. The viscous palate features rock salt, white pepper, coconut, green apples, and a squeeze of lemon. Medium to long in the finish, softly citric, and salty.
-> On page 159 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
This single cask variant of Glen Scotia has been matured in a sherry butt for 21 years, and the cask yielded 833 bottles. Fruity on the nose, with sultanas, cherries, marzipan, and milk chocolate. The palate showcases overripe oranges, sherry, and plain chocolate, with a tang of brine. Drying in the finish, with pepper, licorice, and subtle smoke. £110
      		
 
			
 
One of the latest batch of single cask bottlings from Wemyss Malts is a 15 year old Clynelish, named ‘Fresh Fruit Sorbet.’ 331 bottles have been released. Tinned pears, new-mown hay, honey, and lemon sherbet on the nose, with a hint of machine oil. The palate is smooth and fruity, with pears, figs, and a suggestion of black pepper. The dominant fruitiness continues through the sugary finish, with a background prickle of spice. £60
      		
 
			
 
One of four Spring 2013 single cask releases from Wemyss Malts, Fruit Bonbons was distilled at Glen Garioch in 1989 and bottled during 2012. The out-turn was 325 bottles. Homemade lemonade and a dash of table salt on the early nose, then heather, ginger, and finally the sweetness of icing sugar and fudge. Apples coated in cinnamon, nutmeg, caramel, and dark treacle on the palate. The finish dries, from apple pie to oak and plain chocolate. £90
      		
 
			
 
One of the batches of spring 2013 single cask releases from the prolific Wemyss Malts, Candied Fruit is a 15 year old Auchentoshan, and 294 bottles are available. An aroma of sweet shops, vanilla, and white pepper on the nose, becoming maltier, with dates, sultanas, figs. Apples and pears on the light-ish palate, with coconut and ginger. The finish is fruity
spicy
satsumas
and finally, drying. £62
      		
 
			
 
This 20 year old single cask release from the Perthshire distillery of Aberfeldy runs to 242 bottles, matured in a hogshead. Apricots, green apples, ginger, and icing sugar on the nose. Soft fruits, notably peaches, gingery oak, and more icing sugar on the palate. Milky coffee, caramel, and eucalyptus in the slightly oaky, medium-length finish. £90
      		
 
			
 
This 25 year old single cask bottling of Glen Garioch from Wemyss was one of a dozen released in late 2014. The hogshead in which maturation took place yielded 357 bottles. The nose gives apple, banana, vanilla fudge, nutmeg, and soft spices. Creamy and nutty on the palate, with a squeeze of lemon, soft toffee, and milk chocolate. The finish is medium in length, spicy and nutty, with cocoa powder and just a suggestion of smoke. £87
      		
 
			
 
This is the Lowlander among Wemyss Malts’ dozen single cask releases for the fall of 2014. Maturation took place in a bourbon barrel, which yielded 295 bottles. Tinned peaches in syrup, caramel, mild vanilla, and damp tweed on the nose. Medium-bodied and intensely fruity on the palate, with apricots, raspberries, and ginger. Fruit notes linger in the finish, with spicy milk chocolate. £70
      		
 
			
 
Wemyss has picked up where The Easy Drinking Whisky Company left off a few years back and are selling their mix of malt whiskies under a descriptive flavor name. This is the best the company has done so far. It is a delightfully soft, fruity, and dessert-like whisky with, yes, lashings of honeyed malt to make it a soft, succulent treat of a whisky. Wemyss comes of age.  £36
      		
 
			
 
Nose is much more integrated than the others; caramel and light honey tones with an oaky vein. After four CCs that were sequentially innocent, clumsy, eager, and balanced, this one is confident: well-rounded, sweet but not goopy, oaked but not prickly. Well-named: this is a classic Canadian.  
      		
 
			
 
In the 1980s, when white spirits elbowed whisky aside in the marketplace, unneeded barrels of Canadian Club continued aging. Japanese whisky lovers delighted by the resulting flavor boost demanded a new Japan-only CC. Sweet and hot, the classic pruney, figgy fruitiness of Canadian Club interweaves with new cedar fence posts. Vaguely pulling tannins lend a bitter edge that first amplifies blistering hot pepper, then muffles it into the soothing, glowing warmth of bubbly ginger ale. (
¥ 3,375
-> On page 160 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
A judicious infusion of vanilla and spice bolsters cinnamon, pepper, caramel, and aged oak, while leaving the rye whisky character intact. Prune juice tinged with citrus fruit balances sour black licorice and earthy artist’s canvas. The palate has a creaminess, but with pithy, silky tannins. Burning hot cinnamon hearts and syrupy sweetness take us vaguely into liqueur territory. A complex nose, but a simple palate that soon fades into white grapefruit and a warming peppery glow. (Canada only) C$26
      		
 
			
 
Still in the same vein as its 17 year old sibling reviewed above, but it’s softer, mellower, with more wood impact (especially on the nose and back end of the palate) and tea leaves. Perhaps even some mild tobacco. Darker sugars in this one (molasses?) rather than honey, and more berried fruit along with the citrus, which struggles to reveal itself. Dry, resinous finish. An enjoyable dram, even if the wood outstays its welcome. But if you have to pick between the two expressions, go for the 17 year old and pocket the change with a smile on your face. Price: 
      		
 
			
 
This young distillery’s fourth release, aged entirely in bourbon barrels. (This is the first one available in the U.S.) The two previous releases that I tasted and reviewed (the inaugural release and the Autumn 2009 release) were finished in sherry casks. I miss the sherry, to be honest. I think it softened the whisky, added a new dimension, and perhaps even masked some of the youth. Still, this is a very nice effort: brisk, vibrant, and bracing, with plenty of raw peat smoke and tar, along with pear, citrus, vanilla, licorice root, bourbon barrel char, clove, bitter chocolate, and suggestions of olive brine and high-end mescal.
      		
 
			
 
This 30 year old bottling from Teaninich was distilled in December 1982 and matured in a refill butt. Just 201 bottles have been released from cask #9323. The nose is characterized by lemon curd, flat Coca-Cola, and spicy malt. The palate is smooth, sweet and fruity, with vanilla and stem ginger. Autumn berries and more ginger figure in the lengthy, slightly charred finish. £195
      		
 
			
 
This blend is soft and quite sweet, with low levels of spice and that characteristic Nikka richness behind, a classic fist in a velvet glove. Ripe, round, and generous, there’s cocoa and butterscotch, with plenty of persimmon and nutmeg. Lush, round, and balanced; a classic Japanese blend. This will become the core blend in the range, and should be appearing in the U.S., hopefully, in 2015. ¥5,000
      		
 
			
 
Very grassy, with dry earth and pink peppercorn layered in, but none of the heat you’d expect from unaged 92 proof rye. Very well-behaved on the tongue; oily, bittersweet, with the 95% rye mash rolling like an unhurried river, one long, smooth wave of rye flavor. A whiskey like this could be called too simple, but this is strikingly single-minded. A likely candidate for cocktails at the price.
      		
 
			
 
Unlike the Knob Creek bourbons (which are 9 years old), there’s no age statement with this new rye, which tastes relatively younger. It’s bracing, vibrant, and spicy. (The rye contribution is unmistakable.) Cinnamon spice and crisp mint dominate, with charcoal, botanicals, ginger, nutmeg, honeyed fruit, vanilla, and caramel. Warming spice finish. Its dynamic personality should shine in cocktails, but from a sipping, drinking neat perspective, I wish it was a little older like its siblings.
      		
 
			
 
Quite the antithesis of the Signature Craft 12 year old, released at the same time. This one is finished in Spanish brandy barrels, so I expect it to be a polarizing whiskey. The brandy influence shows, with sweet fruit (sultana, honeyed tangerine, pineapple, ripe apricot) and spice (vanilla, cinnamon, ginger) interwoven with caramel. No age statement. Youthful, but not immature. A limited edition release.
      		
 
			
 
This is another young peated whisky, but the earthy and dusty smoke is wrapped around a honeycomb and milk chocolate center. It’s both rugged and comforting, the whisky equivalent of chili chocolate: a bittersweet love affair for those who enjoy the contrary nature of sweet and savory. €77 (Currently not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Bearing the easiest name of all the Kornogs to pronounce, this is also the least challenging and complex. It is, pretty much, a straightforward peated whisky with more citrus fruits than the others, some apple and pear in the mix, and some chilled spices. The finish is long, smoky, and spicy. Benefits massively from a little water. €86 
-> On page 161 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
If you cannot wait for Jean Donnay to start distilling at Gartbreck on Islay, console yourself with this Celtic whisky made by the sea, with malt peated to 35-40 ppm. The nose has hard, dry peat, cold charred logs, and heather twigs, but enough creamy sweetness to keep it buoyant. It shimmers and twists on the tongue, showing shades of light and dark. Nuts, treacle, licorice, and raisins emerge, though the structure shows its youth. Dry, sooty finish. €60
      		
 
			
 
South Africa may be home to an increasingly impressive wine industry — and a noted brandy producer — but the country is also home to two whisky distilleries. Drayman’s in Pretoria is run by brewer Moritz Kallmeyer, while the James Sedgwick distillery in Wellington is home to Three Ships and Bain’s Cape Mountain Grain. Bain’s was created by distiller Andy Watts as a way to attract the new, female drinker. Sweet and succulent, this is like an alcohol ice cream sundae — fudge chunks, toffee, and butterscotch syrup, not to mention the ice cream, You pile on the pounds just smelling it. A lush beauty.
      		
 
			
 
Bakery Hill has been at the forefront of Australian whisky for some years now, but David Baker's struggled to keep making good whisky and simultaneously open export channels for it. That's about to change, and a good thing too, because this is very good indeed — clean, fresh, and malty with plenty of honey and vanilla — smooth, blemish-free, and excellently made , this wouldn't look out of place in Speyside. A$88
      		
 
			
 
Pale, with fresh perfumed/fragrant estery notes that touch on flower blossom, almond icing on a custard cake, and even a little candy floss. All very aromatically intense, with quite a hot focus on the tongue. With water you keep the concentration and add in lemon, jellied fruits, and light, dusty spiciness.
      		
 
			
 
Mat and Rachael Thomson run a small, hands-on whisky business, moving toward a sizeable and successful whisky business. Truth be told, much of what's left from the Willowbank distillery is average. This isn't. It's an example of just how good the distillery could be, with citrus at its heart, plus gutsy and prickly savory notes and some salt and pepper to fill it out. Later on there's a trace of spearmint and even menthol. NZ$142
      		
 
			
 
No age statement, but it includes 4 to 7 year old whiskeys. The mashbill is 95% rye — much higher than most standard rye whiskeys out there. It’s brisk, vibrant, and loaded with spice (crisp mint, warming cinnamon, cocoa, hint of anise). Fruit — ripe nectarine, apricot, golden raisin — drizzled with maple syrup. Dry oak rounds out the finish. Bold enough for cocktails. Mature enough to drink neat (or on the rocks). 
      		
 
			
 
This veteran Lowland Inverleven — distilled within the now decommissioned Dumbarton grain distillery complex — is a recent addition to Chivas Brothers’ Cask Strength Edition series, and is exclusively available at distillery visitor centers and from www.maltwhiskydistilleries.com. The nose is creamy, gentle, and sweet, with vanilla, rum raisin ice cream, and a subtle, contrasting peppery note. Mouth-coating, with citrus fruits and slowly developing dark chocolate, which lingers through the long and gingery finish. (500 bottles). Currently not available in the U.S. £275 
      		
 
			
 
Okay, how many of you have walked past this one thinking the price is just too crazily low for the liquid to be any good? How many have started your whisky life with this and then set it aside? Time to rethink. Speyburn, one of the forgotten distilleries of Rothes, is a charmer. Sweet and fragrant with notes of blossom and a little red fruit on the nose, the palate shows ginger, cream, and rhubarb. (Value Pick)
      		
 
			
 
Warm, delicate vapors curl from the glass: dry grain, sweet orange peel, honey candy, but all of it ethereally light. Quick in the mouth, makes other whiskeys seem heavy with wood. Sweet grain is the base of the structure, with a skin of soft citrus candy and custard notes. Wood is mostly present as a lightweight frame, almost like a zeppelin framework containing delicate volumes of flavor. This is craft, charting a new course.
      		
 
			
 
True to its name, the nose is exactly Red Hots candy along with a touch of corn underneath. The entry is soft cinnamon, but it quickly ramps up to fiery Red Hots candy. The proofing here matches the flavor precisely, for a pleasantly spicy but not overly fiery mid-palate. The finish is short and cleans up well with light lingering cinnamon left behind. A good balance of sweet and spicy, and a solid offering for the genre.
-> On page 162 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
With the majority of the blend coming from older single malts, this forms a counterpoint to I and II (see below). Toasted spices, fennel, black peppercorns, cocoa, malt loaf, split orange peels, and salted caramel invade the nose. The palate is a gluttony of chocolate. Beneath, look for dried fruits, macchiato, peanut shells, and some tannic bitterness as the older malts show their wares. It leaves a cocoa finish without the sweetness. A great concept for self-educating your palate. £106
      		
 
			
 
The second 20 year old single barrel release, sold at Heaven Hill’s Bourbon Heritage Center. (I rated the first one a 96.) Like its predecessor, this one sports a beautiful nose — and beginning of the palate — with toffee, nougat, pecan pie, and coconut truffle. But some fairly aggressive, tactile oak on the finish keeps this whiskey from earning a higher rating.
      		
 
			
 
Sourced whiskey, selected then finished by Big Bottom in Zin casks at their Oregon warehouse. Ruby glint to the whiskey, and a big, sweet, hot nose with a wine-side fruity slant to it. Wine’s more apparent
on the palate; there’s a bit of oak bite and red wine tang heating up the bourbon, which is broad, without obvious corn. The corn appears in the finish, which is firm and gripping. The Zinfandel finish is well-played here.
      		
 
			
 
Big Bottom has made their name finishing sourced whiskeys. Now they’re experimenting with a blend of undisclosed whiskeys in a bourbon base. The result is a riff on Canadian-style whisky. Dark gold in color, the nose is light oak, caramel, cinnamon, and cherry. On the palate it’s a pleasant mix of creamy vanilla, oak, and cinnamon. A medium finish features light charred oak and black pepper spice. A unique approach to the style, one that manages to really work.
      		
 
			
 
Fruity with dried dates and figs, peaches, peach pits, purple plum pits, and hints of black licorice. Tingling cloves and ginger add zip to traces of bitter chewing tobacco. Powerful, firm, and drying with pulling tannins like a fine Bordeaux. While this is gorgeous whisky in its own right, the French oak flavors have overwhelmed the familiar clean, spicy, fruity base of the original Masterson’s on which it was built. 
      		
 
			
 
Another MGP/LDI-sourced whiskey: but New Holland finishes it in oak barrels that they’ve used to age their Dragon’s Milk imperial stout, an interesting reversal of the bourbon barrel-aged beers brewers are making. It gives a dark wood nose with cinnamon and hot fruit. The whiskey’s a bit light in the mouth but enticingly smooth, a flow of corn, wood, and anise that flares up at the finish in a nice rush of heat. Quite good…but not great. 
      		
 
			
 
Maryland, Monongahela, and, I guess, Modern are the American rye styles. Maryland was a gentler rye, less spicy, and not as hot/sweet as modern rye. This has the dry-grass spice of rye, a hint of cocoa powder, and a bit of funk that blows away to hints of fruit. Light and clean on the palate, some sweetness that rapidly dries out in a grassy, herbal wave. Intriguing, without being overwhelming.
      		
 
			
 
This is a creamy, rich, refreshing departure from the more common styles of Australian whisky and it's ample proof that diversity will be a major part of the Oz story. This is milky chocolate and cocoa, almost like cachaça, with some soft violet and red wine notes, and—somewhat bizarrely—black currant sorbet. As I said about shouting Aussies above, this is anything but; a delicate, light-fingered exercise in style. A$125
      		
 
			
 
Chopped vanilla beans were added to barrels of Bowman bourbon (in varying amounts); the barrels were married after 24 months and bottled. The nose has soft vanilla and sweet orange; it's almost soothing, balm-like. Vanilla is not at all overpowering in the mouth, but shows more as a richness around the edges. Otherwise, a good, sprightly bourbon with a nice citrus and oak finish; like to try this in a cocktail.
      		
 
			
 
 is a Japanese slang term meaning “small,” which is appropriate given the size of the cask—quarter-size—used for maturing whisky from a 
 distillery. This has the intensity of youth with some lemon meringue pie, pomelo, and hint of night-scented stocks. As the nose suggests, this is a wee (
) sweetie with mouthwatering citrus character and soft-centered sweetness moving to mace, strawberry, and a popping candy finish. Akuto-san is making some great whisky. £95
-> On page 163 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Lifted, quite estery and delicate, with fruit blossom, preserved lemon, and light minerality. It needs water; when added, out burst blossoms, brioche, and fondant icing. On the palate, there’s a frothy pink party going on: marshmallows, flowers, raspberry, and cream. Water adds silkiness, while the finish throws out yuzu, then tightens in the manner typical for a young whisky (it’s 3 years old). Not only on the way, but getting there. ¥25,000/700 ml
      		
 
			
 
Single barrel, and not chill-filtered. Notably spicy (especially cinnamon) and gripping on the palate — the ten years in oak are not lost here. Some botanical notes too, especially toward the finish. Somewhat aggressive, but underlying notes of caramel, candy corn, and ripe tangerine help soften the blow. Despite its slightly imposing personality, it shows character and never steps over the line. (A Julio’s Liquors exclusive.) 
      		
 
			
 
Well-named: hops aroma comes flying right out of the glass — green pine and light peppermint — along with hot, sweet booze, but it’s a very clean scent, not feinty or heavy. The whiskey itself is quite light, not overbearing, and sweet with more pine and mint, along with a very pure malt character and a light touch of oaky vanilla. This is IPA booze, a rain-pure version, and more barrel could ruin it. Great gateway whiskey for a beer geek. 
      		
 
			
 
A “mesquite smoked Texas single malt whiskey,” this is a distillation of Ranger Creek’s Mesquite Smoked Porter. If you’re expecting to get shot out of the saddle, surprise: the aroma is quite delicate, with light mesquite, malt, melon, and butterscotch. The mesquite strikes first in the mouth—ashy, drying, a bit medicinal—followed by the cooler, sweeter malt and melon, and a hint of the chocolate malts in the porter. Another good young (6 months) whiskey from Ranger Creek. Price is per 375ml.
      		
 
			
 
A new Small Caliber Series bottling, distilled from 100% rye. Nose gives rye dough, mint candies, and a push of rye oil and crushed grass. Punchy and perky on the tongue, hot and spicy young rye character with black pepper and bitter rye slicing through a sweet body; quite dynamic. Ranger Creek makes exciting whiskeys, for sure, and this one shows an increasing talent for balance. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Oddly smoky nose that grows on you — this is blue corn smoked with Texas scrub oak — you can smell burnt oak and light wreathings of corn. The first jolt is jalapeño without the heat, followed by a cornbread rush with a very light riff of smoke. The smoke builds to the finish and curls nicely around the corn. A very different whiskey experience; one I could get to like (could I try some with a plate of brisket?). 
      		
 
			
 
Sweet corn and dried cherries on the nose; pleasantly, quirkily intense. The palate is clean, sweet with corn and a hint of those cherries, framed by oak, and leads to a finish with no surprises: corn, oak, and a slight clench of heat. It’s almost predictable: there are no real flaws, but there’s no greatness, either. Still, solid delivery is a good thing. (sourced whiskey) —LB
      		
 
			
 
Very different than other straight rye whiskeys you might be familiar with: there’s no corn in the recipe, just a large percentage of rye and a small amount of malted barley. It’s youthful, with spice as the defining character (cinnamon, mint, allspice, freshly ground pepper), balanced by blackberry preserve, caramel, butterscotch, and a hint of cotton candy. Lingering dried spice and polished oak on the finish provide balance to the sweeter notes.
      		
 
			
 
There’s that 95% rye mashbill that tags this as an LDI-sourced rye…but it’s been finished in French oak white wine barrels. Pepper, warm ripe red plum, sweet vanilla, and a slice of nougat make for a sweet and urgent nose. The rye blows up in the mouth, lots more peppery spice, some flashy mint, and a thin, honeyed sweetness that hints at the nougat. Finish is a bit clingy, but a nice young rye with an interesting difference. (sourced whiskey)
      		
 
			
 
Still Waters blends sourced whiskey with under 9.09% of their own young spirit as top dressing (hence the name; it’s one part in eleven). Sweet cereal, honey, and flowers on the nose, which become much more authoritative in the mouth. Still sweet, but with a firm thump on the tongue, hot thin honey, crushed flower petals, and a lively, welcome heat for 40%. Clean, cereal-honey finish. Could be a bit more robust, but I like it fine as it is. (Ontario exclusive)C$35
-> On page 164 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Last time we reviewed Telsington it came with a warning. Everything from triple distillation, unusual ways of drying the barley, and through to Pinot Noir wine casks for maturation is designed to take you from your comfort zone. Not for everyone, we wrote. But this is a big step on. There’s an almost bourbon or rye quality to this. There’s burnt toffee and stewed red berries. Deliberately nothing like scotch, but we’re starting to see
what Marcus Telser is aiming for. €71
      		
 
			
 
Appropriately caramel-colored. The smell of caramel and taffy pushes out of the glass, but as you get closer, there’s the fresh green snap of clear corn whiskey laced through it like fruit in your dessert (with an authoritative boozy crack to it). Nothing’s overpowering on the palate — a swirling, balanced ride of sweet candy, fresh corn, and estery booze — but the finish sings a clear, pure note of…salted caramel. This could teach flavored vodkas a thing or two. 
      		
 
			
 
The Teelings were responsible for giving us the quite wonderful Greenore, which moved up the gears until it hit stunning at 15 years old. This, I suspect, is back to the start and is a work in progress. But it has all the right parts even if it isn't firing quite yet. Its nose is industrial and a tad sappy, but the taste makes up for it: sweet, light, with smoky ashtrays and almond pulp.
      		
 
			
 
That Boutique-y Whisky Company is an independent bottler noted for quirky and very contemporary label design. The whiskies carry no age statements. Springbank Batch 2 has an outturn of 450 numbered bottles. Initially, overripe pineapples and dry hay on the oily nose, cut by a sprinkling of salt. Brittle toffee, and finally, hand-rolling tobacco. The palate is very fruity; more pineapple, plus peach, developing peat, plenty of spice, and more tobacco. The finish is relatively long and slightly herbal. £58
      		
 
			
 
Have you ever noticed how some distilleries never appear under independent labels? They say they put a teaspoon of whisky from another distillery in each barrel; no longer a single malt. Whether they really do, who knows? So here is a blended malt with 99.99 percent of the whisky from one distillery. This has no peat and is sweet, honeyed, and rich, with vanilla, banana, lime sherbet, and tropical fruits. Almost certainly from Speyside…but where? £50
      		
 
			
 
All-malt, double pot-distilled, aged 2 years in new, charred, 53 gallon oak barrels. Nose has cereal and muted apple notes, some light grassiness, youthful. Exciting on the palate: hard candy, vanilla, oaky spice, hints of maple; it’s a jubilance that doesn’t end, but doesn’t get tiresome like some sugar-high toddler either. Finish is just more of the same, which is okay, but mildly disappointing. Well done, but quite pricey. Price is per 375ml.
      		
 
			
 
Grandiose name for a perfectly acceptable but ultimately tame and straight-ahead Irish whiskey. There are hints of pot still oiliness, and the expected green fruits are in place. But the only new trick on offer here is the fact that it is less sweet and cloying than its brand siblings, the apples are like baked apples filled with mincemeat, with nutmeg and cinnamon in the mix. Frustrating, in that it hints at greatness but doesn't follow through. 
      		
 
			
 
Henric Moulin is a passionate ‘grain to glass’ whisky maker who established Sweden’s third pot still distillery in 2008. This 25-cask batch puts up a nose of cantaloupe, green grapes, fruit syrups, Black Jack candy, kid leather, and a whiff of peat smoke. Soft in the mouth, it’s peppery, with herbal notes, slabs of vanilla fudge, and a little milk chocolate. Water adds a dash of creaminess, but it’s preferable neat. The wax-dipped bottles will appeal to Maker’s fans. €90
      		
 
			
 
This is a sharp dresser, with a firm, solid mouthfeel and an altogether finer and more focused taste than Shieldaig Classic (see
below). It’s not coastal or earthy particularly, either. Instead the flavors are softer and built around mocha, smooth creamy toffee, and some soft fruit, including a touch of overripe banana and melon notes. The savoriness this time comes from a touch of pepper rather than salt.
      		
 
			
 
This is like listening to a quiet and understated musician and slowly starting to realize that there are all sorts of clever
nuances just beneath the surface. This evolves from a floral and welcoming nose, through a saline note and on to pepper and a Highland earthiness, but wrapped up in a rich, honeyed body. A nice balance between the ruggedness and sweet softness. All rather pleasant.
-> On page 165 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
More pale than other crafts I usually see; the whiskey is 12 to 21 months old and spends time serially in wine casks, medium toast American oak barrels, and finally “very experienced” French oak. Smell is
quite young, but clean, with notes of orange and rye grain, and a whiff of nutty toffee. Quite a lively mouth, with much more toffee, less orange, a hint of odd spice (cardamom?), and a twist of milk chocolate at the finish. Interesting stuff.
      		
 
			
 
Ontario government retailer LCBO bought this barrel for an exclusive bottling, and it’s a doozie. The first nose is all fresh flaxseed before peppermint, anise, and sweet fragrant flowers waft in. A few minutes later the nose morphs into peach cobbler with lingering suggestions of dry grain. Cooked peaches sustain the palate until sweet spices arrive, bringing hints of oak and creamy barley sugar with them. There’s lots of action in this whisky glass. (
C$70
      		
 
			
 
It might be Italian single malt, but it isn’t whisky. It’s getting there, though, and this is very sippable in its own right. This is from the far North of Italy, where the influence is heavily Austrian. It’s very well made indeed, is bursting with vibrant fruit, and is good enough now to be enjoyed as an aperitif. It will appeal to Italian palates, which are fond of very young spirits. €35
      		
 
			
 
Here’s something interesting: all-malt, but not all barley malt, there’s some rye and wheat malt as well. The rye pokes through as fresh grassy notes, struggling with the young barrel character. Detonates on the palate: spice, fudge, vanilla, grain, and oak. This is brash, loud stuff, broad-shouldered, insistent, and cocky. Could find favor with the hophead clan of craft beer drinkers. You’d think it could use some taming, but given a chance, its boldness is appealing.
      		
 
			
 
This Dalmore single cask variant was distilled in October 1996 and filled into a refill hogshead, which yielded 139 bottles in January 2014. Freshly-mown hay, then marzipan and nectarines on the well-spiced nose. Nutty caramel in time. The palate features Terry’s chocolate orange, vanilla, and nutmeg. Citrus fruits and malt in the finish, with hazelnuts and a hint of oak. £90
      		
 
			
 
A pale grain from the colossal Fife distillery, released at 18 years old as part of Signatory’s Vintage Single Grain Collection. Vanilla icing, digestive biscuits, pumpernickel, toasted coconut flakes, crushed cumin seed, and a background note of fresh mint are apparent. The vanilla and blossom honey flavors are in union with the buttery, lightweight texture, and there’s a pulsating spiciness that lives on in the finish. A refreshing alternative. £26
      		
 
			
 
The nose is more reticent than that of its younger sibling, with less spice and succulent fruitiness. A hint of nougat, but overall, drier and ‘quieter.’ The palate is silky, with walnuts and allspice, while fruit notes are provided by plums. Following the overall theme here, the finish is also drier than that of the 16 year old variant, featuring a sprinkling of spicy cocoa powder. Relatively lengthy. Exclusively available to travelers at World Duty Free Group stores in selected airports throughout the UK and Spain. £90/liter
      		
 
			
 
Situated between siblings Barterhouse and Old Blowhard in flavor profile. Firm spice, botanicals, dried fruit, and a kiss of honey rest on a bed of caramel, along with resinous oak, leather, dark chocolate, and a hint of tobacco on the finish. Lovely nose, but there’s substantial oak on the palate. The sweeter notes make an effort to balance the oak, but the oak still dominates. For those who like a drier, spicier bourbon.
      		
 
			
 
The aroma is rich with pumpkin pie notes and a strong citrus component. There’s eight tons of actual pumpkin in the year’s run of this seasonal; impressive, and you can smell the roasted gourd. The whiskey’s not sickly sweet as feared, but more like a homemade, sugarless pumpkin pie, almost savory. The flavor is solid, rich, and integrates well. For what it is, it’s done well, and it’s done boldly. I’d maybe back off the orange a bit.
      		
 
			
 
Austria now boasts more than a dozen distilleries. Combining maturation in fresh bourbon, sherry, and Madeira casks can help younger whiskies like this to combine different flavors. The Madeira and sweet sherry dominate the nose initially, but there are dried cherry, fresh fig, marzipan, and shelled pistachio too. It’s a smooth, light to medium-weight dram with good maltiness, ground almond, latte, dry sherry, milk chocolate, apple, and baked pears. The long finish leaves raisins and a coffee-bean intensity. €48
-> On page 166 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
A rich, sumptuous nose of deep, oxidized sweetness derived from storage in 128-liter madeira barrels, this cask strength Broger has wafts of fallen orchard fruit, gooseberry fool, young rhubarb stems, and lime curd. It’s thick, chewy, and syrupy, wallowing in flavors of toffee apple, deep vanilla, and stewed fruits, though with a dash of water, some brown bananas and coffee cream notes peek through. A fabulous nose, but the palate is pulled toward an overripe, fruity profile. (164 bottles) €84
      		
 
			
 
According to the maple syrup geeks who make Sortilège, Quebec’s sugar maple forests produce their sweetest, woodiest, most robust flavors in the early days of the late-winter syrup season. This maple whisky is proof positive. Creamy sweet, slightly peppery, leafy in a good way, and richly imbued with woodsy maple, Sortilège stays firmly in the whisky camp, though just downwind from the sugar shack. Like maple syrup itself, it leaves the palate slowly. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Interesting that the label says “Artfully Aged,” yet there’s no actual age statement. Lively nose, good rye snap and spice, a bit of mint and oaky edge. Not hot, well-behaved on the tongue, and happily gives back everything taken on the nose. Sweet, spicy, and easy to like, this is whiskey without flaw, well-done and tasty, if not overly ambitious or challenging.
      		
 
			
 
Made from an Irish whiskey recipe from 1865 (“dug up” by David Wondrich), with malt, raw barley, rye malt, and rolled oats, distilled in an alembic pot still. Amber with a distinct red/pink cast to it. Very fruity nose—greengage plum, mulberry, sweet orange—with creamy vanilla. Tastes of sweet cereal with a firm bitter keel; the fruit returns as an echo in the finish. A very craft beer-like whiskey; challenging, interesting, unexpected. A bit brash, but worth investigating.
      		
 
			
 
The Walsh Family releases 6,000 bottles in every small batch of their single malt. Each bottling is a combination of triple distilled whiskey matured in 
 sherry and bourbon casks. The nose is bright with vanilla icing, butterscotch, and dried peach. The taste is quite active, with honey, cinnamon, gingerbread, ground almond, and dark chocolate. There is a brief flat spot where the bitterness burns through, before it fades to leave a pleasing tickle around the gums.
      		
 
			
 
Aultmore is normally light and estery, and this pale dram is true to this. After a whiff of fresh turmeric, there’s an almost oily green note with William pear before acetone, and something akin to school Bunsen burners (a good smell) emerges. The palate is more coherent than the nose; sweet, rounded, and more substantial that you expect, with tinned pears in custard. Lively and charming; shows none of the firmness of youth suggested by the nose.
      		
 
			
 
This North British has been led astray; well, subjected to three months’ confinement in first-fill 
 sherry wood. Such are the ways of Darkness! There’s a savory nose of peppered filet, mustard seed, and tarragon. Interesting, but not to everyone’s taste. The creamy texture consists of evaporated milk, strong caramel, dark toffee, and black currant granola, though that savory character persists. Water pumps up the cream, raspberry, and cereal notes until it sees daylight, becoming almost a breakfast whisky. £70
      		
 
			
 
Wigle’s also doing a series of finishing experiments with the addition of honeycombed wood chunks to their organic wheat whiskey; this one uses white ash. Sweeter nose than the straight-up wheat whiskey 
; mouth is cleaner, and the astringency I noted on the end is ameliorated. All a matter of degrees though; quite similar to the regular wheat whiskey. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
This is straightforward, straight shootin’ Irish whiskey. Creamy country fudge, toasted muffins, glorious sweet malt, waxed lemons, and delicate spices on the first sniff. It’s light in the mouth, with lemon curd, juicy caramels, and vanilla custard tarts: simply bursting with warmth. It concludes with spices twinkling on a malt theme. Have your Irish whiskey experiences only been with the big names? Go live a little. You ought to get this: sugar and spice and all things nice.
      		
 
			
 
Big mint/grass nose with sweet grain and a touch of vanilla behind it. Fiery, slippery with rye oiliness, popping with that mint, and rye-bitter on the finish; a bit of a bully. That's not all bad, though; too many ryes strive to be smooth these days, but this lets it rock, and does it well. A chunk of ice doesn't hurt this at all. Potent, bold. Sourced whiskey.
-> On page 167 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Wyoming Whiskey (Kirby, Wyo.) is making bourbon from Wyoming grain, on a column still, aged in full-sized barrels...in the Wyoming climate. Minty, grassy, meadow-varied plants; a bit of cedar and old clothes. Mouth is fuller, with more corn sweetness and balance than the small batch 
. Notes of sweet citrus, rye punchiness, and that cedar flit by quickly in the mouth, and the finish is long and smooth. Much preferred over the small batch.
      		
 
			
 
Light on the nose, with creamy vanilla, honey, soft oak, and delicate tropical fruit. Similar follow-through on the palate. I like how creamy and clean it is -- especially for 21 years old. It’s a light whisky, the kind that 21 years in the wood could have put a hurtin’ on, but it didn’t. An enjoyable Canadian whisky. (Exclusive to the Canadian market.)
      		
 
			
 
Quite a bit darker than most other whisky creams. Chocolate and caramel—on the burnt side, an interesting difference—in the nose, with a sly hint of whisky behind it. Sweet and creamy, a bit clingy, with just a sting of whisky.  Somewhat generic, though, because that interesting dark caramel is in the nose only, and I’d like this to be a bit more distinctive; more Forty Creek. Still pleasant enough for booze candy! C$29 
      		
 
			
 
Aged 10 years in icewine barrels — a Canadian specialty — and like icewine, comes in a tiny bottle. Sweet malt aromas, some grape character, with a brandy-like edge slicing through it. The high proof comes through as evaporative rather than hot, and it’s quite drinkable undiluted: some creaminess even, and some of that sweet icewine intensity to it. A drop of water brings more whisky out: bold, a bit hot. The icewine finishing is an experiment with promise. Price is per 250 ml.  
      		
 
			
 
Past bottlings were distilled at the Bushmills or Cooley distilleries (excepting the rare, original 1951 Vintage, which was from the old B. Daly distillery). This one is triple distilled, so think Bushmills. (Cooley distills their whisky twice.) In the past, I’ve noticed a lot of flavor development in Bushmills from 10 to 12 years old. This Knappogue 12 year old is a fresh, clean, smooth Irish whisky, displaying a nice creamy texture. I’m finding honeyed vanilla, toasted marshmallow, and lots of fruit (citrus, pineapple, coconut, and peach). A soft, dry oak finish shores up the sweetness and adds a smattering of spice. A pleasant, entry-level Irish single malt. (Additional note: Knappogue Castle has historically been a whisky with a vintage, not an age statement. While it will be nice to have some consistency here, I will miss the subtle differences that each of the previous vintage offerings provided.) 
      		
 
			
 
Cardhu—for me, at least—means intensity, and this delivers precisely that, with masses of
citrus (bergamot and grapefruit) and just a hint of dark chocolate behind. With
water, there’s red apple and Victoria plum, while the mouth is precise, with
any richness cut with fresh acidity. Zesty and fresh on the finish. Try it in a
Bobby Burns. Released without any fanfare, here’s evidence that Cardhu’s
rebuilding its reputation nicely. £66
      		
 
			
 
The second generation of The Spice Tree. (This new expression sports a much larger tree image on the front label.) While the first bottling used inner French oak staves to impart additional oak influence, this one uses French oak barrel heads. This new bottling is also bolder, displaying more oak -- there are more dried spice notes and it’s more viscous and clinging on the palate. (It’s also less elegant than the original bottling.) Notes of sticky toffee, vanilla fudge, bramble, and red currant give way to oak resin, cinnamon, clove, nutmeg, and subtle lemongrass. A tactile, somewhat resinous, polished leather finish wraps it up. A nice whisky, but I really enjoy the subtler, more elegant nature of the original bottling better.
      		
 
			
 
Dark and mysterious. Thick and chewy. Notes of fig cake, glazed fruit, oak resin, tobacco and cedar. Bold, spicy finish balances the chewy sweetness. A digestif, if not an entire meal. 

      		
 
			
 
New packaging, new formulation, and even a new strength. The new packaging is more stylish, the new formulation is more approachable, as is the new strength (45% rather than 50.5%). The previous Russell’s Reserve was big and brooding, with huge flavors of chewy toffee, oak, leather, and tobacco. This new expression is more elegant, with lighter sugars (honey, cotton candy, caramel, maple syrup), more fruit (candied orange, pineapple, coconut), and creamy vanilla. A tame expression of Wild Turkey (although the flavors are nicely balanced and seamlessly tied together). Ideally, I would like to see the bourbon with the new formula but bottled at the old strength of 101 proof. 

      		
 
			
 
Dry, spicy, and leathery on the nose, with candied fruit and toffee. Similar on the palate, but the dryness takes a more demonstrable role, especially toward the finish -- leather, dried vanilla, warming cinnamon, and brittle mint, with some candied fruit, toffee, and molasses struggling to prop it all up. Bottom line here: this year’s offering has less of the richness, fullness, lush fruitiness, and sweetness that balanced all the dried spice and leather notes the past two years (I rated both a 94). Still a nice bourbon, but a slight setback for Eagle Rare 17 year old.
-> On page 168 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Amber-walnut color. Deep, mature aromas of wood spices, mint, molasses, and dark, candied fruit. Thick and mouth coating. Flavors of molasses, mint, leather, dark fruit, leading to a very long, very dry wood and spice finish.
   Style: Bourbon. Price: high $20s. Limited availability. 

   The oldest of the Ezra Brooks line, and a very mature expression. Some might find this whiskey a little too woody and dry. Otherwise, there's plenty of character and complexity to entertain the palate.
      		
 
			
 
By far the “sweet spot” when compared to its siblings. The most versatile and the best value of the entire portfolio. Good enough to enjoy neat, but economical enough to use as a mixer. Caramel corn, vanilla, soft nougat, light barrel char, gentle fruit, hint of cinnamon and nutmeg.Value Pick.
      		
 
			
 
“Mellow as moonlight” on the label; the old Cascade slogan, from the pre-Dickel branding days at Dickel. This is a throwback too; from before the barrel. The nose is full of sweet and fresh corn “cream” and cornbread, a nod to Dickel’s 84% corn mashbill. Some peppery notes join it on the palate, but that corn sweetness follows all the way to the end. One of the best white whiskeys I’ve tasted, and not overpriced.
      		
 
			
 
Off-market for two years. Nose of caramel, sugar wafers, and a touch of just-ripe nectarine. Sweet/smooth in the mouth, with sweet mint, rock candy, and gliding King syrup flavors slipping all over the tongue, while oak notes provide high spiciness. Finishes with a lingering light sweetness, like a dissolving sugar flake. With all the sweetness, though, it doesn’t cloy. Nice, if not complex.
      		
 
			
 
Broodingly thick and syrupy in texture, and quite dry-especially on the finish. Twenty-three years is a long time for bourbon to spend in oak, and this one shows its age. The flavors and complexity of its younger two siblings is evident until mid-palate, but then dwindles slightly as the whisky progresses, replaced by dry, spicy, leathery, sooty-charcoal, tobacco notes. 

      		
 
			
 
The successor to Barton Brand’s Ridgewood Reserve 1792 bourbon. An improved successor, too. This bourbon is much more rounded than the Ridgewood, and has shed the aggressively dry, woody finish. The Ridgemont sports a nice silky texture. On the palate, gently sweet notes of vanilla, caramel, and candied fruit balance nicely with dry, spicy notes of mint, cinnamon, and green tea, with just a hint of tobacco on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Fruitier, sweeter, and more straightforward than the new 16 year old. Ripe tangerine, orchard fruit, and caramel apples, all on a bed of nutty toffee. Underlying notes of cinnamon, nutmeg, and ginger, with a dusting of dark chocolate. After the sweetness fades away, there’s lingering spice and oak resin on the finish. A good alternative to Macallan 12 year old or Glenfarclas 12 year old.

      		
 
			
 
Somehow this 12 year old—a mix of sherry and American oak—is overlooked by malt lovers heading straight to the mental world of a’Bunadh. This is Aberlour at a crucial point in its growth: you’ve lost the maltiness of the 10 year old, but there’s none of the heavy toffee and licorice of a’Bunadh or older expressions. Here it’s sweet fruits in charge: red apple, black currant, plum. The sherry has added depth, the American oak honey. Length and balance. 
      		
 
			
 
This year’s Ardbeg Day bottling is named in tribute to World Cup host Brazil’s national colors: Auri (Gold) and Verdes (Green). Very restrained to start: grassy, sweet with vanilla pod, shoreline, and smoke wrapped in a woolen blanket. The palate shows more smoke, light chocolate, Ardbeg oiliness, and soot. It’s fresh and charming, but ultimately is a quarterfinalist beaten on penalties.
      		
 
			
 
This is the second batch of Arran 12 year old in cask strength format, and it contains a higher percentage of sherry cask-matured whisky than the first. The out-turn is just over 13,000 bottles. Fresh and sweet on the nose after an initial note of resin, with oats and hot butter. Full-bodied, syrupy and sweet on the palate, with apricots, ripe bananas, nutmeg, and walnuts. The finish majors in plain chocolate, maraschino cherries, and a suggestion of smoky sherry. 
-> On page 169 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Arran first introduced its peated Machrie Moor variant some five years ago; since then it has become a firm favorite. Late 2014 saw the appearance of the first cask strength edition of Machrie Moor, limited to 6,000 bottles. Wood smoke, warm tar, and emerging new leather on the bold nose. Sweet peat and spices on the palate, barbecue sauce, and black pepper. Long in the finish: vanilla, with sweet smoke and chili.
      		
 
			
 
Similar to the Classic in its tropical fruit and honeyed vanilla, but with more depth, emerging nuts, and dried spice. Thicker too—with a slightly oily texture. A noticeable improvement from the Classic. This 12 year old is worth the few extra bucks. It’s the most rounded and balanced of the three new whiskies.
      		
 
			
 
The 11 year old triple distilled Lowland single malt in this bottling has been matured entirely in French oak casks that previously contained Bordeaux wine, then bottled at cask strength. The nose offers contrasting sweet and sour fruit notes, red grapes and gooseberries, damp newspaper, warm stone, and vanilla. Herbal, with cloves and spearmint. Mouth-coating, bittersweet on the palate, with molasses and — inevitably — red wine. Dark chocolate, raisins, and aniseed in the drying finish. 
      		
 
			
 
Another recent addition to Aberdeenshire bottler Duncan Taylor’s Dimensions range, launched late last year. The nose is very fruity, with sliced peaches and apricots, plus a porridge-like background note. Relatively full bodied and malty, with intense fruit notes, then dark spices appear. The finish is medium in length, spicy with aniseed balls, then a lingering creaminess at the very end. £42
      		
 
			
 
Morrison Bowmore distillers has recently released a virgin oak-matured expression of its Auchentoshan single malt, which has no age statement. The North American oak casks have been charred prior to receiving this Lowland whisky as their first fillings. The result is a nose of Madeira, cinnamon, vanilla, and white pepper. Very spicy on the palate, with citrus fruits and plain chocolate. Lingering in the finish, with cocoa powder, icing sugar; becoming slightly more bitter with time.
      		
 
			
 
Light to medium in body, but quite flavorful. Firm spice notes and subtle brine (both of which are often found in Northern Highland malts) makes the whisky fresh and quite lively. There’s a soothing, mouth-coating, toffee sweetness providing balance and depth. This is the first distillery bottling of Balblair available here in the U.S. in a long time, and it is very welcomed. 

      		
 
			
 
The third and final release of the 1989 vintage of Northern Highland malt Balblair is on sale in Europe initially, with U.S. availability (at approximately $95) this fall. Initially quite reticent on the nose, with a hint of potato chips, mild vanilla, lemon, and unripe bananas. Full and rounded on the palate; nutty, with tropical fruits and lively spice. Medium length in the finish, with apricots, instant coffee, and milky cocoa.  £60
      		
 
			
 
This 2002 expression of Balblair replaces the previous 2001 vintage as the ‘entry level’ bottling. It is naturally colored and non-chill filtered, in line with the rest of the Balblair range, and has been matured in bourbon barrels. Fizzy lemonade, banana skins, and violets on the nose, with soft caramel developing in time. Fruit and nut milk chocolate on the palate, with ripe apples and vanilla. Long, floral, and lively in the finish. £40
      		
 
			
 
Balblair’s 1996 vintage expression replaces the previous 1995 variant as a travel retail-exclusive bottling, and maturation has taken place in bourbon casks. Ginger snaps, peaches, pineapple, and vanilla on the relatively light, fresh nose, which also has just a wisp of smoke in the background. Medium-bodied, the palate offers soft toffee, milk chocolate, spices, and the same fruit notes as the nose. The finish is quite lengthy, with a final flourish of black pepper. Price is per one liter.
      		
 
			
 
Big sherry influence immediately, with walnut skin, raisin bread, and mixed peels. Seems pretty dry, and the malty undertow here is whole grain bread. Balvenie’s signature sweetness comes across like soft brown Demerara sugar before it shifts into forest floor, mulch, nut, and dried berries. Just enough residual sweetness to keep the tannins at bay. Water makes it more woody, with burlap, cacao, a little earthiness, and a slightly bitter exit.
-> On page 170 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Finished in a pedro ximinez cask. This is the sweetest and most tactile of the three whiskies. Peat smoke married with lush notes of sultana, ripe peaches, pineapple, white chocolate, shortbread, and thick honey. Delicate floral notes (heather, lavender) add finesse. I expected a darker personality with the sherry finish. I was pleasantly surprised. 

      		
 
			
 
Deeper and darker in character than the BenRiach 25 year old also reviewed here, with more sherry character. Chewy toffee, nougat, and rum infused with raisin provide the foundation of this whisky. Background notes of cinnamon, baker’s chocolate, and a suggestion of wet leather and old parchment add intrigue. 

      		
 
			
 
A peated version of Benriach that was also finished in a port pipe. There is a really nice blend of flavors here; a sweet malty foundation layered with ripe red fruit notes (raspberry, strawberry preserve, currant) and a firm blanket of smoke that goes on and on. All the flavors are bold, but they’re equally balanced. Not a subtle whisky but quite entertaining. (A Binny’s Beverage Depot exclusive.) 

      		
 
			
 
What you look for in a finished whisky is for some of the distillery's character to be apparent, but also enhanced. Benrinnes is a big, meaty dram, which suits sherry and its feral aspect is there. Think of roast beef with damson jam, date, and blackberry. The palate is thick with licorice sweetness and a bitter edge. It has power, and while you can see the join between original spirit and finish, it’s a pretty happy match. £60/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
Meaty, beaty, big, but only slightly bouncy. The nose is initially reminiscent of curried mutton with an added heathery earthiness and some distillery sulfur. It then dries into biltong/pemmican with some faint barley notes behind. The water adds a note of fresh coriander. Massive in the mouth, with raisin, roasting tins. It’s a relief when water releases some surprisingly soft treacle toffee sweetness, but it’s not quite enough to balance the massive meaty assault. (2,892 bottles)
      		
 
			
 
The oldest of the group, and it shows. When compared to younger expressions, there’s less peaches and more citrus (lemon, tangerine). It is thicker on the palate-with notes of fat barley and crème brulee-before dry, resinous oak notes intensify. Dry, spicy finish. Not as even-keeled as younger expressions, but quite dynamic. 

      		
 
			
 
The newest member of the ever-expanding range hailing from Gordon & MacPhail’s own distillery in Forres. This example has been aged in port pipes — and it shows immediately on the nose. Benromach is a teasing mid-weight Speysider, and this has added depth of sweet damson jam-like aromas mixed with Seville orange (marmalade) and some milky nut. Rich fruitcake flavors on the tongue. This is a very well balanced and precocious 12 year old. Worth a look. 
      		
 
			
 
Pale gold color. Aromas reminiscent of a holiday spice cake-ginger, cinnamon, honey, and a touch of citrus fruit. Medium bodied, but it coats the palate-there's some viscosity here. The flavors are rather soothing and very much like its aroma, with a malty sweetness throughout and a lingering finish.

   Style: Highland single malt Scotch whisky. Price: high $80s. Limited availability. 

   The owners of Blair Athol have chosen not to export this whisky to the U.S. For this reason it can be rather difficult to find, only occasionally being imported by one of the independent bottlers. This particular expression is a very good example from this distillery.
      		
 
			
 
This distillery-only bottling strips away the sweet gloopiness of the standard 12 year old — and is all the better for that. The nose is soft and gentle, with rose petals and rose hips over a base of ripe plum and a touch of ginger cake. The palate is intriguing and holds the attention, with citrus fruits, bitter apple, spice, and a touch of peppermint. It is all very clean, sophisticated, and pleasant. The finish is long and warming, and the overall experience is highly enjoyable. Justified as a distillery-only bottling? Without a doubt. 
      		
 
			
 
New to Duncan Taylor’s Dimensions range is this single cask (#2927), cask strength offering from Perthshire’s Blair Athol distillery. Sweet and fruity on the nose, majoring in tinned pineapple in syrup. Toffee, nougat, and a hint of freshly-dug soil make up the supporting aromatic cast. Full bodied and initially as sweet in the mouth as it was on the nose, with vigorous spices, particularly nutmeg, then it begins to dry. The long finish is characterized by powdery cocoa and oak tannins. £80
-> On page 171 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Aged in bourbon casks and then enhanced in Rioja wine casks. A mélange of red berry fruits, firm malt, thick vanilla and spicy oak, along with a hint of grape skin, anise, and orange peel. Gritty, dry finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in refill sherry casks. One taste bears this out with its dominant honeyed fruit foundation (lemons, melons, pineapple). Still, that Bruichladdich freshness and appetizing "sea breeze" character dovetails nicely. Fuller, more rounded, and with a bit more going on here than the Full Strength expression reviewed below, but not as appetizing. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in used bourbon barrels. A fresh, appetizing whisky of brine and white pepper, with an underlying foundation of vanilla, barley, and grassy/hay-like notes. A very subtle teasing of citrus lingers throughout. Very clean and straight-forward, with an appetizing finish. A whisky aperitif? 

      		
 
			
 
It is unusual to find a Bruichladdich whisky with this much sherry influence-this one is aged in a refill sherry hogshead. I must admit that I generally like a less sherried Bruichladdich-it makes it easier to appreciate the distillery's subtle complexities. While there certainly is more than enough sherry to go around in this whisky, the distillery character does manage to fight its way through. This whisky's strong point is that the sherry influence is clean and not insipid like some sherried whiskies. Chewy caramel, toffee, and ripe fruit notes are most evident in this whisky, with Bruichladdich's signature-an appetizing fresh briny character-emerging midway on the palate through to the finish. If you like Bruichladdich and you appreciate a cleanly sherried whisky, then I think you'll enjoy this one.
      		
 
			
 
Fruit is the common thread to this lightly peated whisky; red fruit, that is. Red raspberry, red currant, red seedless grape, strawberry, and red apple. A gentle sweetness (creamy vanilla, light molasses) balances all this fruit. Not overly contemplative, but delightful. This is definitely  not the same Rocks I reviewed two years ago. It is richer, darker in color, and tastes more mature. It's an improved version, and my rating reflects this.
      		
 
			
 
Since its reopening eleven years ago this year, Bruichladdich has been growing barley on Islay—a laudable move. This glimpse into the developing program shows what seems initially to be a delicately fragile dram that soon reveals an intense sweet depth behind the spring flowers. This purity of intent continues on the palate with a thick creaminess that’s typical of the distillery, while a tart finish adds interest. Precocious, but already beautifully balanced.£38
      		
 
			
 
More from Bruichladdich. The latest in the Elements series is clean in a freshly-showered kind of fashion. The fact that it’s backed up with bran, agave syrup, and pancake batter just helps to emphasize this image of a sunlit breakfast. The palate is sweet, fat, and juicy, typical of how texture is as important as flavor with the Laddie. In time there’s some cinnamon with a preserved lemon acidity that enlivens the finish. £55 (500 ml)
      		
 
			
 
Smoke comes at you immediately, the morning-after smoke of a spent fire, mixing with reeds and rushes, a touch of coconut, and light oak. Water is needed to bring out sweetness alongside the Band-Aid note typical of many young peaty whiskies. The palate is a lot sweeter than the nose suggests, bold and quite thick; honey adding a sticky quality that then moves into creosote and antiseptic cream. It needs hefty degrees of dilution. A work in progress. £100
      		
 
			
 
Without water, this is an aggressive malt, sharp and acerbic. With water, it’s still more in your face than any official bottling. Where you tend to associate Caol Ila with oily, peaty, and maritime characteristics, this is altogether more feisty and ballsier, with a glance to the big three peaty distilleries in the south of Islay, and even a nod to its peppery cousin on Skye. On the nose there is peat, but it is tempered by dark chocolate; some citrus there, too. The taste is quite sharp, with bitter lemon, licorice, and sooty peat to the fore. Certainly an interesting take on this intriguing distillery, and far removed from last year’s relatively gentle 25 year old release, but there are questions over the balance, and whether it’s a better whisky is a moot point. 
      		
 
			
 
Pale straw. Delicate and a little akin to chilled 
 sherry: fresh almond, salinity, light yeast. Vibrant, with the smoke held in check. The palate is much sweeter, with finally some cask-derived sugars beginning to show. Then it rushes to the shoreline and takes a gulp of water, giving an effect like saltwater taffy. It needs water to flesh the palate out. £60/500 ml
-> On page 172 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
This single cask bottling of Clynelish from Wemyss Malts is 16 years old, and just 302 bottles were yielded by the bourbon hogshead in which maturation took place. Milk chocolate, orange, and malt on the nose; fragrant, with stem ginger. Zesty and notably spicy on the palate, with applesauce, peaches, and digestive biscuits. Relatively long in the finish, with oak, allspice, and persistent fruitiness.£67
      		
 
			
 
If you’re looking for a bold, dry, spicy Speysider, this is the one. There’s lots of oak here, with bourbon undertones. A fighting vanilla sweetness manages to keep the whisky from becoming too austere. Gritty texture, with cedar wood, clove, spearmint, anise, herbal notes, dried fruit, and dark chocolate. A whisky that awakens the palate. Very invigorating. (Exclusive to The Whisky Exchange, London.)  Price: approximately $100. 

      		
 
			
 
Half the whisky was aged in bourbon barrels, the other half in sherry casks. This whisky has always been on my short list as one of the finest, most affordable 12 year old single malts available. While the price may have gone up a bit (I remember when it was $20!), the quality remains the same. It’s fresh and lively. A well-balanced dram, with its tell-tale orange marmalade accompanied by tangerine, pineapple upside-down cake, vanilla-soaked barley, subtle brine, and caramel, all leading to a spicy cinnamon and dried vanilla finish. A nice “every day” dram.
      		
 
			
 
Aged exclusively in first-fill casks (60% of it sherry cask), and its oak intensity shows. Sweet, but with a steady dose of dried spice, oak resin, and teasing tobacco to back it up. Silky texture and lush, with fallen orchard fruit, tangerine, chocolate-covered orange, and lemon meringue. A firm dried spice finish rounds it all out. Sort of like The Dalmore 12 year old pumped up on steroids.
      		
 
			
 
Matured in oloroso casks. The oloroso takes what is typically a pleasingly honeyed, but not particularly complex, malt and adds a layer of fruit to it. Crisp, clean notes of lemon, pineapple, and ginger, are softened by honeyed malt, vanilla, and hay. Soft, lingering finish. 

      		
 
			
 
The fourth release of peated Edradour whisky. This time it’s aged in 
 sherry casks. There’s a lot going on in this whisky. Yeah, it’s still a little on the young side, but what it lacks in maturity is compensated by a dynamic youthful complexity. A distinctive whisky, with coal tar, damp kiln smoke, caramelized fruit, smoked almond, walnut, licorice stick, and maple-cured bacon. Youthful, sweet, smoky, lingering finish. I’m looking forward to future releases. (6,000 bottles released, but only 900 to the U.S.). 

      		
 
			
 
The latest in this Perthshire distillery’s ongoing Port Cask series of releases has been wholly matured in a bodega port butt since being distilled in 2003. The nose is fragrant, featuring summer berries and glacé cherries, while the palate suggests canned pineapple with cream, contrasting with red wine notes. The finish is quite lengthy, with raspberries, spicy oak, and a whiff of smoke. 
      		
 
			
 
A nice example of what port wood finishing should do for a whisky. The port influence (finished one year in a port pipe) has taken what would normally have been a fairly straight-forward whisky when it is young-clean, light, and dry with subtle notes of herbs and spices-and added some extra weight along with balancing sweet toffee and full fruit, without dominating. (Bottled exclusively for Binny’s Beverage Depot.) 

      		
 
			
 
What is it with all these older, sherried bottles of Glen Grant from the independent bottlers, anyway? Fortunately, this is one of the nicer ones. The balance of sherry and oak is commendable, and the flavor is clean with that Glen Grant “dried herb” character still evident. Sweet fruit notes (berries in honey, peach pits, sultana, ripe grape) along with almonds and tobacco fill out the palate. Clean, warming finish. 

      		
 
			
 
The initial nose is soft fruits doused in condensed milk, which contributes to an overall impression of light toffee and, weirdly for this distillery in its contemporary guise, some smoke. The fruits manage to mix the ripe and slightly sour. Quite intense; it needs water, which calms proceedings allowing typical Glen Grant purity to come through. The fruits now have some added weight and, again, that smokiness. Intriguing! £75
-> On page 173 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
A Glen Ord bottled by the London wine and spirits establishment of Milroy’s, and a relatively rare opportunity to sample single malt from this Diageo-owned distillery. The nose initially presents lemon zest, then peaches and caramel, with cream soda notes. Very fruity and lively in the mouth, with a nutty, malty undercurrent. Medium in length; firm, with spicy fruit lasting to the very end, accompanied by a touch of well-mannered fresh oak. £45 Currently not available in the U.S.
      		
 
			
 
Here’s a rarity. A major player in Ballantine’s, this Moray coast distillery is rarely seen in single malt guise. Very gentle, sweet, and juicy start with licks of cream, a hint of barley, and the gentle grassiness typical of the distillery. In time, light almond and fresh lemon. The palate is lightly sticky — Glenburgie for its lightness always shows good succulence — with buttery vanilla, malt, and a touch of toasty oak. Gentle, sweet, and refreshing. 
      		
 
			
 
There’s plenty going on here, but it’s not as vibrant as the other GlenDronachs. Lots of sherry influence, viscous, and a bit sappy, with Curaçao, honey-drenched fruit, raspberry tart, black cherry, and ripe malt leading to a grape stem finish. An enjoyable whisky, but my least favorite of the bunch. 
      		
 
			
 
In style, this is closest to the 1978 in its levels of sweetness. Here, though, there is added key lime pie, juicy white peaches, and whipped cream alongside that deep Glenfarclas roasted ‘polished brass’ note. The medium-weight palate is pure and sweet with light orchard fruits. The most freshly acidic of the selection, with a hint of flowers on the very end. £430
      		
 
			
 
Named in honor of the early Portuguese explorers, this newest Glenfiddich expression has spent a lengthy period of secondary maturation in Madeira drums. This has given a rich sweet fruitiness — think blueberry muffins mixed with moss alongside date, fig, and black grape. The palate is sweet and smooth with a pickup of gingery spices toward the finish. Well balanced and quite a departure. (Travel Retail exclusive, not available in the U.S.) £75 
      		
 
			
 
This 19 year old example of Glen Garioch from 1993 offers a nose of orange blossom, sherry, and milk chocolate, becoming sweeter with time. Finally, butterscotch mousse. Sweet and fruity on the palate, with cherries, icing sugar, and a hint of smoky caramel. Medium to long in the finish, with persistent citrus notes, cinnamon, nutmeg, and ginger. 
      		
 
			
 
Following on from Revival, Glenglassaugh has released 6,000 bottles of Evolution, an expression also made after the distillery’s reopening in 2008. It has been matured in first-fill George Dickel barrels and bottled at cask strength. Peaches and gingerbread on the nose, with brittle toffee, icing sugar, and vanilla. Luscious soft fruits dipped in caramel figure on the palate, with coconut and background stem ginger. The finish is medium in length, with spicy toffee.  £50
      		
 
			
 
Exclusively for the U.S. as an addition between the 10 and the 17 year old. Central to its composition is a ‘parcel’ of refill hogsheads, to which a number of European oak butts have been added. Initially slightly herbal on the nose, with developing fresh fruits and vanilla. Finally, caramel and damp leaves underfoot. Full and confident on the palate, with tropical fruits, stem ginger, and hazelnuts. Drying in the finish, with spicy, rich oak and creamy allspice. 
      		
 
			
 
Matured in amontillado casks. Pleasantly fresh, briny, and yeasty, which works nicely with the atypical toffee and nutty notes. Glenkinchie’s dry, grassy character emerges occasionally, as does some delicate background spice and a hint of lime. Pretty hefty stuff for Lowland malt. 

      		
 
			
 
Amontillado casks are used here, which add a certain almond-like note to the nose, as well as more obvious oakiness. The effect is a general deepening and lengthening of aroma and flavor. The dry notes have gone, replaced by a sweeter and more generous palette of flavors. The fresh meadow flowers are more like cut flowers in a florist shop, the fruits hint toward peach, and there’s a new citric burst on the finish.  
-> On page 174 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
This bottling of Glenmorangie has been released to raise awareness of marine conservation. A proportion of the whisky has been finished in 
 sherry butts. The nose offers honey, vanilla, peaches, toffee bonbons, wood lacquer, sherry, and a hint of peat. Soft and elegant on the palate, with fruity spice, nutty toffee, more sherry, and sweet smoke. Slightly smoky in the finish, with soft oak, citrus fruit, and aniseed. 
£60
      		
 
			
 
Taghta—Gaelic for “Chosen One”—is the result of Glenmorangie’s innovative Cask Masters program, in which crowd-sourcing strongly influenced the final release. It is non-chill filtered and has been finished in 
 sherry casks. Fragrant, slightly salty, fruity sherry notes, sweet spices on the nose. New leather and lots of spice on the palate, with olives, rock salt, and a suggestion of red wine. Medium in length, drying, with licorice and black pepper. (12,000 bottles) £65
      		
 
			
 
The first non-vintage Glenrothes in recent memory, allowing the distillery more flexibility in cask selection when making a bottling. True to Glenrothes, this expression is mouth-coatingly malty, with well-integrated bright fruit notes, creamy vanilla, praline and honey. Nutty, delicately spicy finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Matured exclusively in ex-bourbon barrels (American white oak, or quercus alba), and certified kosher. It’s a softer, gentler version of Glenrothes. The bourbon oak influence is very evident, showing creamy vanilla and coconut, with additional fruit (orange creamsicle, pineapple, black raspberry, blueberry, and gooseberry). Soft, creamy vanilla finish. A pleasant, easy-going, seamless dram—and perhaps the most approachable Glenrothes whisky.
      		
 
			
 
Fairly straight-forward but pleasing nonetheless. Creamy on the nose and palate. Nicely malty, too, with interwoven notes of vanilla, caramel custard, and hazelnut, offset nicely by dry oak spices and a hint of peat. A calming whisky best enjoyed after a very stressful day. 

      		
 
			
 
Thick and very tactile. Malty, with good heft. Notes of vanilla, honey, biscuit, and caramel custard. A soothing, comforting whisky. On the surface, not very complex, but very satisfying nonetheless. 

      		
 
			
 
Amber-gold colored (not as dark as the other Beltramo’s offering here), with notes of caramel, honey, heather, and bright fruit, evolving into gentle cinnamon, vanilla, and ginger. Soft finish. A Highland Park for a lazy afternoon. (Bottled for Beltramo’s Fine Wines & Spirits) 

      		
 
			
 
Einar was joint Earl of Orkney from 1014, and this bottling moves the Warrior Series slightly further into familiar Highland Park territory. Some gentle smoke on the nose, with fresh newsprint, ginger, caramel, and a hint of halibut oil. Peat smoke, vanilla, and citrus fruit on the palate. A little peat smoke in the medium-length finish. €53/liter
      		
 
			
 
This 17 year old single cask (#10042) bottling of Highland Park was distilled in September 1996 and is presented non-chill filtered and with no added color in Douglas Laing’s Old Particular range. Baked cereal and peeled apples on the peaty nose, while dark, smoky notes contrast with lighter, fruity flavors on the palate, along with a sprinkling of pepper. The finish dries, with more pepper, bonfire embers, and coffee grounds. £90
      		
 
			
 
Dark Origins is a new addition to Highland Park’s core range, inspired by the distillery’s founder, Magnus Eunson. The recipe embraces twice as many first-fill sherry casks than that of Highland Park 12 year old. Chocolate malt, caramel, and ripe bananas on the nose, with a whiff of coal dust. Silky on the palate, with dry sherry, autumn berries, plus more coal and a spicy, plain chocolate edge. Long and dry in the smoky finish, with black pepper.
-> On page 175 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Style: Islay single malt scotch Color: Pale straw Aroma: Peat smoke-lots of it. Damp earth. Hint of olives and seaweed. Palate: Surprisingly gentle in texture and on the light side of medium in body. A malty sweetness balances the dry-ish peat smoke. Again the damp earth mid palate. An appetizing saltiness emerges towards the finish, but is fleeting. Smoky finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Distinctively pale in color. (A hint of its age?) This annual limited edition release is finally available in the U.S. Youthful, vibrant, and thumping, with the sea flowing through its veins. Coal tar, peat smoke, brine, seaweed, bright fruit (pear, tangerine), and soft vanilla all compete for attention. The only thing holding me back from scoring it higher is that it comes across as a bit too youthful.
      		
 
			
 
Quite nutty (especially the latter half of the palate), with chewy toffee, vanilla fudge, subtle fruit, and leafy smoke. I like the texture of this whisky. Quite satisfying. An improvement over the distillery-bottled 10 year old, which I suggested (Vol. 16, No. 2) needed to reach its teens to begin to fully develop. This whisky validates my theory. (Bottled for Maxwell Street Trading Co.)

      		
 
			
 
As with Rosebank, Douglas Laing & Co. Ltd. has made a habit of releasing single malts from the now-demolished distillery of Littlemill, which formerly stood not far from Auchentoshan. The latest variant was distilled in November 1991 and bottled early in 2012. The nose is fresh and fruity, with vanilla and boiled sweets. Sweetly spicy on the straightforward palate, with ginger to the fore. Spice continues through the finish, with a hint of cedar. £157
      		
 
			
 
Cadenhead is responsible for this veteran cask strength release distilled in 1977 at the now-demolished distillery of Littlemill, located a couple of miles from Auchentoshan. The nose is sweet, with icing sugar, vanilla, honey, and peaches. Damp grass after a while. Initially sweet and full on the palate, slightly resinous, with marzipan and sherbet, then quite bitter oak kicks in. The marzipan and tannins fight it out in the finish. £175
      		
 
			
 
Amber color. Rich, malty aroma with notes of vanilla, honey, oak, and floral undertones. Thick, mouth-coating texture. Flavors are big and malty, with notes of honey and vanilla up front, then becoming rather dry with oak and subtle citrus. Huge, long dry finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Plenty of the distillery’s fresh fruits, here with some Demerara sugar sprinkled on the top, a little hint of almond, peppermint, candied apple, and hard fruit sweets. The palate continues in the same vein, with some more apple (baked this time) and a chalky texture. Water allows it to become more creamy (think orange barley water), while a green fresh note emerges in the background. Just slightly bitter behind.
      		
 
			
 
This expression is atypical for a Macallan whisky-the standard Macallan line is aged in sherry casks, while this one is aged in a bourbon cask. Absent the sherry, this isn’t as sweet or rich. Rather, it’s more delicate and gentle. The whisky is very clean and creamy, with lovely floral notes (lavender, heather, rose), intertwined with spices (especially vanilla), and fruit (baked apple, pineapple, coconut). Delicate, pleasing finish. One of the better non-sherried whiskies distilled at Macallan. (Bottled exclusively for the retailer “Wine on the 9.”) 

      		
 
			
 
An interesting application of Macallan, aged originally in a bourbon cask and then in Ridge Zinfandel barrels. Quite sweet and full-flavored, with ripe, jammy fruit, beach plum, subtle (yet deep) toffee, and grape skin, all laced with honey. Dynamic, fun, and carefree.

      		
 
			
 
A mix of two types of cask, both refill. Typical Port Ellen on the nose, very clean, precise, and austere, hiding its sweetness in a new pigskin wallet. Though there are hints of apple and almond, it has a chalky edge and surprisingly low levels of smoke. With water there’s squid ink and waxed paper. The palate starts with Darjeeling tea and roasted fruits, then heads to the kelp-strewn seashore. As challenging as ever, and actually a bit too dry. £600
-> On page 176 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Straw gold color. A very aromatic whisky, with dry, delicate herbal, floral notes. Light and soft in body. Gentle on the palate-delicately sweet and fruity up front, then becoming dry with herbal, spice notes. 

      		
 
			
 
Pale gold color. Aromatic, floral, herbal aromas (a veritable potpourri), with soft background vanilla malt notes and a hint of lemon. Light and soft in body. Soft, malty vanilla notes on the palate with interwoven notes of herbs, subtle dried fruit, and delicate wood resins. Gently dry finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Thick barley and viscous, with ever-present brine and berried fruit throughout. Underlying notes of waxy fruit (no doubt from some sherry cask aging), clementine, pineapple, and black licorice emerge, followed by the brine kicking in again towards the finish. The most rambunctious of the three. 

      		
 
			
 
Springbank’s tasting room bottling of its triple-distilled malt will not disappoint any fan of the official bottling; all its rounded and honeyed characteristics are firmly in evidence here. The nose is soft and sweet, with praline and a touch of condensed sweet malt joining creamed vanilla. Without water, the malt is surprisingly robust and prickly. Dilute it, though, and it’s a very pleasant drink, with crystallized grapefruit, traces of hickory and menthol, some honey, and sweet candy. Later on, spice comes through, and the finish is long, fruity, and spicy. An interesting take, but not a radical departure from the official bottling. 
      		
 
			
 
Style: Speyside single malt scotch Color: Golden bronze Aroma: Syrupy. Honey. Fruit gum drops. Anise. Spearmint. Palate: Thick, viscous, surupy. Honey up front, then becoming dry through to the end, with notes of dried fruit, mint, and oak. 

      		
 
			
 
Very thick in texture and mouthcoating -- almost chewy -- with ripe barley, shortbread cookies, and honey up front. Dried vanilla, violet, cinnamon, and bright fruit notes emerge mid-palate. The dried spices and moderate oak tannins linger on the finish, contrasting the whisky’s rich, sweet entry. If this whisky were a road, there would be a lot of hills.
      		
 
			
 
A tamed Talisker. The classic Talisker personality shows-seaweed, brine, peat smoke, and freshly ground pepper on the finish. There are even other interesting flavors I enjoy, notably vanilla, licorice root, charcoal, and bitter chocolate. But this whisky needs to be a little livelier to be a truly great whisky. While there’s no age statement, there’s older whisky in here for sure, and maybe that’s part of its “reserved” nature. It certainly is a nice whisky, but I would prefer the more vibrant Talisker 18 year old -at two-thirds the cost. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged on the Scottish mainland for 14 years and then finished off in sherry casks on the Island of Mull. A fresh whisky with a hint of brine, along with richer nutty toffee and chocolate fudge, embedded with dried fruit. Delicate oak resin peppers the finish, balancing the whisky’s sweetness. One of the best unpeated Tobermory whiskies (i.e. non-Ledaig) whiskies I’ve tasted. The sherry enhances the whiskey without dominating.

      		
 
			
 
One of Speyside’s youngest distilleries, Tomintoul has been a relatively shy performer until recently, when a raft of new releases (some peated) have appeared. This non-chill filtered example is, for me, the best of the bunch. Pale in hue, it has a light, clean floral aroma — think daffodils — with plenty of white fruits and very subtle oak. The palate has pear juice, light vanilla, and a long sweet finish. £34 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Selected by distillery manager Douglas Campbell, currently in his 50th year at Tomatin. It has been matured in a combination of American and European oak casks, and just 200 cases have been released. Citrus fruits on the nose, notably oranges, and apricots, with a hint of damp soil. More fruit on the palate, orange wine gums, ginger, and gentle oak. Long and slowly drying in the finish, with encroaching aniseed and tannins. 
-> On page 177 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Tomatin Legacy has been matured in a combination of bourbon and virgin oak casks, and after an initial release in Europe, worldwide availability will follow. Honey and malt on the nose, melons; fragrant and mildly herbal. White pepper and ultimately a whiff of treacle. Fresh and lively on the sweet, fruity palate, with tinned pineapple, cake mix, and more pepper. Quite dry in the medium length finish, with a suggestion of chili. £26
      		
 
			
 
The nose is nutty and earthy, with dry sherry, cooking apples, vanilla, and emerging icing sugar. Finally, a hint of sea salt. Silky in the mouth, with lively spices, Jaffa oranges, muted sherry, and mixed nuts. The finish is medium in length, nutty, with spice and persistent citrus fruit.
      		
 
			
 
There’s something rather round peg in a square hole about Tormore, that grand urban palace of a distillery in wildest Speyside. The whisky, sadly, is often the same. Here, though, things look promising to start with: rice crackers, and a spicy, rye-like hardness on top of a vanilla-accented, sweet trail mix of a nose with some earthiness behind. The palate, for me, is still too rigid. For all its efforts to relax, this Tormore remains tense. £90
      		
 
			
 
Tullibardine has been offering a 1988 vintage edition for several years, but in 2011 it bottled a new variant at 23 years of age, matured in a mixture of first-fill bourbon barrels and ex-sherry hogsheads. Malt, vanilla, carnations, and peaches on the full nose. The palate is initially sweet and fruity, with toffee, lively spices, and more herbal notes duly appearing. The finish features cereal, spice, and white chocolate. £47
      		
 
			
 
Finished principally in Pedro Ximenez Spanish sherry casks, Tullibardine 500 Sherry has a fragrant nose, with new leather, beeswax, apple, and vanilla. The palate is smooth and sherried, with more leather, brittle toffee, orange peel, honey, and nutmeg. The fruity finish is notably spicy, with lingering wood polish notes. 
      		
 
			
 
This is clearly Oban. Time in Montilla fino casks hasn’t diminished the fresh fruitiness. The orange zestiness has also been retained. Like the ‘Kinchie, what the finish has done is allow the palate to thicken out and show what seems like a more mature personality. A new heavy floral note emerges. All in all, there is greater concentration and ripeness with an added ginger note. Another edition that improves on the original.
      		
 
			
 
A blend of bourbon, rye, and smoky Scotch whisky. The foundation here is bourbon sweetness (caramel, toffee, vanilla) with a tug-of-war between rye spice (cinnamon, evergreen, nutmeg) and peat smoke. Tobacco and honey-soaked berries round out the palate, with additional leather notes on the finish. Not something I would drink every day, but this whisky packs plenty of intrigue. (sourced whiskey) 
      		
 
			
 
High West now has aged whiskey of their own make. This oat whiskey was aged “less than two years” in used cooperage, and that’s just what it looks like, about chardonnay color in the glass. The aroma is mellow and sweet, with a hint of flowers and grapes. Clean and surprisingly mellow sweet grain flavors, even a bit creamy, but the 46% delivers a high bite. Very nice finish. (Limited annual release in December.) 
      		
 
			
 
This whisky has no age statement, but it is only several years old. It’s also finished off in a Madeira cask. Nicely matured for its age; perhaps, in part, due to its unique copper distillation system. It’s a soft whisky, with layers of creamy sweetness (vanilla, toffee), delicate fruit (coconut, blueberry, black raspberry), and almond, with a little youthful heat on the finish. Already pleasant, this whisky should only need a few more years to reach full maturity. 

      		
 
			
 
Cooley distillery’s oldest grain whiskey to date, and marketed as a limited edition. Similar in personality to Greenore 8 year old -- rather light and gently sweet -- but deeper, more oily in texture, not as crisp, with enhanced spice notes. You’ll also find soft creamy vanilla, lemon meringue, cut hay, orange rock candy, teasingly subtle bitter chocolate, and a dry, spicy finish. Whether you like the 8 or 15 year old depends on mood and time of day. I find them equally pleasant in personality.
-> On page 178 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
It shows nice maturity, considering it contains whiskey as young as two years old. Smooth, too, with layered sweetness (honeyed caramel, English toffee, maple syrup), tangerine, roasted nuts, and peppered with spice (warming cinnamon, glazed ginger). Good grip of tobacco and polished leather on the finish balances the sweetness that comes earlier. An example of the right way to do artisan distilling.
      		
 
			
 
The Mackmyra success story just goes on and on. There have now been more Specials than bottlings of Privus or Preludium, and the whisky makers seem to have hit upon a trademark taste that they tweak with each bottling. It's a mix of salt, pepper, citrus, and vanilla, and here the vanilla is at its most subdued and the salt is at its highest. That makes this challenging to anyone unfamiliar with the Mackmyra brand. SEK 649
      		
 
			
 
Wemyss Malts names the sources of these single cask bottlings for the first time in the series. ‘Caribbean Fruits’ is a 1990 Glencadam. The hogshead in which it was matured has yielded just 320 bottles. Sweet on the nose, with apricots, fudge, creamy vanilla, and drinking chocolate. Tropical fruits on the palate, with malt, hazelnuts, and spicy oak. Tannins and cocoa powder in the finish. £80
      		
 
			
 
One of two single cask bottlings of 17 year old Clynelish released by Wemyss Malts in the fall of 2014. The hogshead provided 373 bottles. Pineapple and nectarines on the nose, with salted caramel. Mildly herbal. The palate is rich and viscous, with a sprinkling of pepper over sliced red apples, sweet spices, vanilla, and hazelnuts. Lingering in the finish, with lemon; nutty and lightly oaked. £68
      		
 
			
 
Who could refuse a blend of single malts wholly matured in 
 sherry casks? They’ve perfectly bottled the aroma of molten tiffin: the chocolate, cocoa, biscuit, raisin, dried dates, and walnut are all here. Sipping brings on chocolate, coffee, malt, ginger, nutmeg, and dried fig. There’s no slow reveal, it pretty much lays its cards on the table immediately; rather than developing flavors, they extinguish one, by one leaving a finish of cocoa and maltiness. (6,000 bottles) £40
      		
 
			
 
Good balance between ripe barley, rum-like sweetness, and damp kiln smoke. Dried oak spice, bourbon char, brine, and anise add complexity, peaking on the finish. An interesting contrast to the other Amrut whiskies. This whisky could pass for a youthful Islay malt.
      		
 
			
 
We can thank Bangalore’s climate for the arrival of this 2009 distillate. Honeycomb, vanilla shortbread, crispy tart shells, graham crackers, and malt extract make for an attractive proposition. It tiptoes onto the tongue, but within seconds you get the thundering sense of its full strength approaching. Dried fruits, wood spices, malt loaf, chewy caramels, shortbread biscuits, with Horlicks malted milk on the finish. A dash of water triggers a sensation of plump raspberries dipped in chocolate. £59
      		
 
			
 
What a surprise! Really thick and malty for a blend (there’s a high malt content here for sure), and also nicely mature for 8 years old. Great balance too, with the island aggressiveness tamed by a rich, malty elegance. Delicious honey, toasted oak, firm peat, dark chocolate, and glazed citrus meld nicely with the malt, leading to a honeyed, lightly-peppered finish. Very enjoyable.
      		
 
			
 
Good weight to this blend. Creamy and mouth-coating on the palate, with a nice malty, honey-tinged backbone. Bright fruitabounds, with golden raisin, lemon meringue, peach, and a hint of pineapple. Notes of creamy vanilla and gently nutty, through to its soft finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Deeper and darker when compared to its younger siblings, but with the same personality. Drier, especially on the finish, with added oak resin, espresso, leather, and tobacco. Bonus points for character.

-> On page 179 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
An uncommon exclusive bottling of a 6 year old cask strength malt. Light gold in color, the nose is vegetal, more peat bog than peat smoke, with an undercurrent of pastry cream and rose. It’s an odd combination of aromas. The entry is flavorful and inviting with smoked pineapple, clove, and rose. Peak smoke arrives in full force in the mid-palate, which drops the sweet and becomes spicy. The finish is mostly smoke, but with a pleasant minty coolness.  (
)
      		
 
			
 
The back label of this whiskey describes it as “feisty,” and feisty it is! Brandishing 95% rye (another Canadian flavoring whisky that was diverted?), bottled at 46%, and at a relatively young age (around two years old), this whiskey lets you know you are alive. It’s very spicy, with crisp evergreen, warming cinnamon, clove, rooty licorice, dark chocolate, and suggestions of gin botanicals. Spicy, vibrant finish. I’m having fun drinking this au naturel (the whiskey, that is), but this would also zing in a cocktail, the same way smoky Islay whiskies make their presence known in a blended scotch. Value Pick.
      		
 
			
 
Moderately rich, with layered caramel, vanilla, fig cake, and subtle sweet corn. Date, raisin, and a dusting of spice (cinnamon, cocoa, hint of ginger) round out the palate, leading to a gently sweet, soothing finish. A very versatile bourbon — certainly enjoyable enough to drink neat, but you won’t feel guilty if you make a cocktail with it or drink it on the rocks.
      		
 
			
 
Van Zuidam distillery’s star has risen rapidly — it’s under ten years old —and its single malt and rye are confident forays into the world of whisky. So is this. This is 5 ½ years old and is a distinctly different take on peat, with little acerbity, oil smoke, or charcoal. A softer spiciness is present — it’s an almost ginger cake quality, with menthol and lemon-lime candy in the mix. €55 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
There are now more distilleries on the Australian island of Tasmania than there are in Ireland, Japan, or Canada, and the island is demanding to be taken seriously as a whisky territory. At the forefront of the Aussie invasion is Sullivan’s Cove, once home to some decidedly ordinary whiskies, but now kicking into gear. This needs water, but is a unique mix of fruit, nuts, and soft malt. Clean, more-ish, and unique, this is Australia raising its flag.
      		
 
			
 
This verdant Tasmanian whisky is the combined product of American oak and French oak port cask aging. You get waxy palm fronds, hazelnut shells, toasted spices, and celery tops laid over a groveside box wedged full of freshly-picked Florida oranges.Soft, honeyed, and gently spicy on the palate before the herbal and botanical notes overgrow it, leaving clove, pepper, and aniseed balls on the finish. Water cuts through the greenery to show lemon meringue pie with a grapefruit edge.
      		
 
			
 
Although the Aussie whisky-making industry started in Tasmania, the distilling bug is spreading across the country. Small-scale the distilleries may be, but the use of brewer’s yeast, local peat (in Tasmania’s case), and wood sourced from the wine industry has immediately given Aussie whisky an identity of its own. Yes, it’s tiny, but every great new whisky, no matter where it is from, chips away at Scotch whisky’s hegemony. Tasmanian-based Bill Lark is the founding father of the modern Australian whisky industry. He uses local peat and ages in small casks — and only does single cask releases. This means that by the time a tasting note is written the whisky has gone, but here’s what I thought of one of them. There’s a glimpse of some fresh malt, but it is the heightened aromatics that are the most interesting here. Lark points to the yeast mix as the origin of this scent. His small stills, however, give a muscularity to the palate, while the oak is in balance. €99 
      		
 
			
 
Lark Distillery celebrates its 20th year in 2012 and it's starting to settle on a house style: big apple fruity whiskey with menthol, candy cough drop, and hickory notes, and some red berry fruits from maturation in quarter casks made from port barrels. This special bottling uses casks made of wood that held 100 year old Para Port, among the world's finest. All the Lark traits are there, with a liqueur-like bonus. Intriguing. $AUS 132
      		
 
			
 
A “branded” malt, meaning we don’t know which distillery this whisky came from. Fresh and quite fruity (peach, nectarine, golden raisin, orange, pineapple) with a nice underlying honey, vanilla, and caramel sweetness. Soft, gentle, malty finish. It’s clean, nicely balanced, and pleasant.
      		
 
			
 
Don’t remember ever reading that Michael Collins suffered from schizophrenia… This is a bewildering whiskey suffering from an identity crisis; its fruity apple Irish heart wrapped in wood, some peat, and conversely, some sherbet and sugar-coated almonds. It’s not unpleasant — far from it — but the journey from sweet apple to sharp spice is a challenge. Stay with it and ultimately the complexities of the malt win through. 
-> On page 180 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Sweet, rich candy — pulled taffy, boiled sweets — with a little hot edge. Signature Canadian sweetness, but with more depth and a gently mouth-coating feel. Touches of vanilla, caramel, and some of those candy notes again, but the finish isn’t cloying. No overt evidence of the toasted maplewood finishing. Another exploration of what Canadian whisky is, or can be, that stays within bounds and makes the sweet whisky idea work.  
      		
 
			
 
Triticale is a wheat/rye hybrid, which I guess appealed to the wheat-mad Dry Fly distillers. Aromas of grass, bubble gum, and oak. Taste is young, brashly sweet, but smooth enough to spread easily over the tongue. There’s spice—light cinnamon, a zip of allspice heat—and grassy brightness, but they’re dressing on the juicy sweet center. Not flawed, and well-made, but I wish it had more to say. Price is per 375ml.

      		
 
			
 
Hazelburn was first produced at Springbank during 1997. It varies stylistically from ‘traditional’ Springbank, as it is triple distilled using unpeated malt. The 8 year old expression has been matured in 60 percent ex-bourbon and 40 percent sherry wood. The nose is fresh, light, fruity, and faintly resinous, with gentle spice. Sherbet, malt, and vanilla on the attractive and lively palate, with developing spicy oak and a hint of pepper in the finish. 
      		
 
			
 
From Finger Lakes distilling; one of two craft ryes I’m revisiting this issue. An interesting aroma of dry hay, dried fruit, and burlap that’s appealing to anyone who’s spent time on a farm. Smooth but not laid-back on the tongue, there’s plenty of good stuff going on here. Peppery rye, some soft fruit, that fresh burlap, and an urgent but not unwelcome heat. Maybe a little overdone on the fruit, but well-done overall.
      		
 
			
 
Master of Malt is an online whisky company that seems to try its hand at most things and is bringing a fresh irreverence to the world of whisky. This was created in partnership with the bass guitarist of British rock band Athlete, and it's rather good. Sweet and rich with toffee, orange chocolate, and honey, it's another blend with a lot to say for itself.  £55
      		
 
			
 
Master of Malt has accumulated quite a trophy cabinet for their work on blends. The nose is inviting, with butter toffee, Bramley apples, fennel seeds, cut lawns, and chocolate-covered oat biscuits. It’s a pretty smooth proposition, serving up caramel maltiness, stewed apple, and orange and grapefruit pith, with just a hint of sharp lemon freshness to open up with. The ginger finish is zappy but short. A solid, everyday blend.
      		
 
			
 
A relatively high rye grain content for a bourbon (36%). The port adds richness (fleshy fruit) and helps the whiskey taste older than it really is (by masking some of its youthfulness?). Notes of ripe cherry, soft plum, mandarin orange in syrup, dates, and toffee. The spices (cinnamon, mint, and a dusting of cocoa) pick up mid-palate and finish strong and warming. A slight bit more port than I would prefer, but the spice vibrancy still shines through. 
      		
 
			
 
Hot nose, plenty of rye spice — it is 100% rye — mint, bay leaf, sweet clove. Quite a kick, but there's good flavor behind it; more spice, oak, and a firm sweetness. The finish is quite quick, just some dry rye in the back of the mouth, and gone. Better-behaved than most Hudson whiskeys I've had; hardly mellow, but enjoyable. Price per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Brazen stuff, blowing raw, fresh-sawn oak (six months in small, heavy char barrels) and cocoa/caramel right out of the glass. For all its youth, it's drinkable; hot, assertively oaky, but drinkable, thanks to the glowing depth of malt character in the glass. The oak's buoyed by rich, cocoa-tinged toffee, and the finish is like a very good hot chocolate. It's going like crazy; love to see where it would be in four years. Limited edition of 500 bottles. Price per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Armorik is made by Distilleries Warenghem in the Brittany region of Northern France and you expect something gutsy and rugged. This is nothing of the sort, though the relatively high strength and the fact that it's non-chill filtered ensure plenty of taste, including a scattering of spices that tickle and tingle the palate at the finish. Before then, though, the key flavors are vanilla, honeyed cereal, overripe melon, and banana. Delightful.  €38 
-> On page 181 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Seaweed piled in a beach bonfire, Keemun tea, hide-covered tomes, and toffee apples. Soupy, salty smoke without the heat on this dram, which was matured for 6 years in first-fill 
. The flavors bring an array of apple peelings, cough sweets, aniseed, and roasted sesame seed before developing some savory elements of roast pork. A spicy tingle takes you through to the finish. Water coaxes out apple jelly and pear notes. (1,000 bottles) €58
      		
 
			
 
Can you get sweet peat? For that’s what we have here. Very fragrant, with delicate wood smoke mixing with citrus and roasted barley. When water is added, there’s a mossy note and the sweet warmth of cow’s breath. Continues in this vein in the mouth, with the peat now becoming like hot embers. Again, citric on the end, though more like Amalfi lemon with light bite. Very good. ¥24,000/700 ml
      		
 
			
 
Is buckwheat a grain, seed, or nut? Doesn’t matter: you can malt it, so Corsair put it in their rye bourbon as a fourth…whatever. Aromas of corn, vanilla, and teaberry, with a pleasant broadness and light herbal notes. There’s a nutty note to the sweet corn and vanilla, and a move in the direction of astringency, but it’s intriguing, a definite plus. The layered finish has a woody nip to it, that dry earthiness, and sweet corn. 
      		
 
			
 
Distilled from imperial stout and “vapor infused” with hops, this is a bold example of Darek Bell’s “Alt Whiskeys.” Piney hops, hot toffee, and chocolate notes fill the nose. It’s a long ride on the palate: brisk spice first, then hops and hot malt, a mealy undercurrent that pulls you from a cocoa start to a hot and sweet finish, with a burnt note on the very end. Busy, but consistent.
      		
 
			
 
A young (“minimum of 6 months”) rye, finished in California vermouth barrels. The results are polarizing; I’m in the “intriguingly tasty” camp. The nose: rye spice with herbal depth and fruit wreathing. The whiskey hits first, but herbal vermouth is right behind, putting more body on the spirit and cranking the finish in an unexpectedly dry, almost bitter direction. An aperitif whiskey, begging to play with cocktails, or even ice, but good neat. Craft whiskey continues to experiment.
      		
 
			
 
Sweet nose with a hint of soft-boiled egg, digestive biscuit, and cedar (nowhere near as nasty as it might sound!) Warming orange peel notes, toffee, rye grassiness, a trace of horehound, and light, oaky vanilla make a sweet but somewhat angular mouthful. Finish is a bit edgy and boozy; the weakest link in the glass. A bit of water helps the finish a lot. Nothing sticks out too much; a good whisky. (Canada only.) C$24
      		
 
			
 
Nose is full of a wonderful, authentic maple syrup smell with a warming background of whisky. The maple’s there in the mouth, too; not overwhelming, and blending well with the whisky. There’s a good balance here, for what it is, and the finish is clean. If you like maple, this is going to do it: it’s not cloying or thick, and could make a great cocktail with — really — bacon.
      		
 
			
 
More widely available than Buffalo Trace’s adored Bourbon Cream, Prichard’s takes premium cream from Wisconsin and adds it to their Sweet Lucy liqueur. The nose is sweet but not overly so, with orange creamsicle and just a hint of whiskey with oak spice. On the palate it’s creamy confection bliss, with ladyfingers covered in heavy cream and candied orange topped with a drizzle of bourbon. Rich, creamy, but not too heavy; file this one as a dangerously delicious guilty pleasure.
      		
 
			
 
We don't see very much Craigellachie as a single malt because most of it goes into blending, and from that we might draw the conclusion that it's not particularly distinctive in its own right. If it plays a role in this mix it's a submissive one then, because after a not altogether enticing nose that has gooseberry, green salad, and some prickly chili pepper, the palate is all about a mouth-coating big pepper hit that stays long into the finish. €40
      		
 
			
 
Darker gold in the glass than regular VO, but sporting that same VO nose of caramel and dry corn. Fuller grain sweetness in the mouth, with some nice light fruitiness—white peach, seckel pear—coming out, and there’s a sweet cinnamon smear along the roof of the mouth. Dries significantly toward the end, and finishes quickly, but with everything in good order.
-> On page 182 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Rich, full, and clean cornbread nose with just a hint of herbal zip; not what I expected at all from a white whiskey with a jokey name and label. Light, vaporous corn glides over the tongue with a hint of fresh grass, easing off the palate to an airy corn finish; a lingering thought of corn. Corn eau de vie, with an accomplished touch on the still; very impressive.
      		
 
			
 
Local Montana grains in an impressively brown all-Montana bourbon. Has a small-barrel smell to it—a dry wood and hard candy note I’m starting to recognize—and a snap of rye. Interesting: light but not weak in the mouth. I found their moonshine not that clean, but the wood’s done a good job on it. Rye grass and sweet corn mingle with pepper and anise. Clean finish. 
      		
 
			
 
Malt whiskey and honey flip back and forth in the nose; so precisely balanced my nose doesn’t seem to know what to make of it. Light and a bit frisky in the mouth, and the honey is more a grace note than a strong presence, though it does come in more in the finish. Not overly sweet, not heavy, but it’s hard to see the honey as a real game-changer.
      		
 
			
 
One of a series of Berkshire bottlings done in barrels used to age craft beers; this one aged the massive (29%!) and complex Samuel Adams Utopias. The beer barrel adds a depth to Berkshire’s usually brighter character, a rounded and full sweetness with rum and fruit notes. There’s heat and youthful sweetness, and a pleasing fullness that grows toward the warming finish. A nice twist on the usual bottling. 
      		
 
			
 
Another from a series of beer barrel-finished bourbons from this Massachusetts distiller; this one’s from a Terrapin Brewing’s Monk’s Revenge Belgian IPA barrel. Nose is fruity and sweet, with an undertone of linen and old iron. There is the bitter and faintly piney edge of hops in the whiskey, which adds a cutting grip to the finish. Before that, there is spoonbread, oak, and a hint of anise. Interesting components, needs a bit more integration.
      		
 
			
 
The old name for Edinburgh has been hijacked for use on this mix of Islay malts, and appropriate it is. The creosote, damp outbuilding, and oily rope nose is distinctive and strong, the peat pronounced in the taste, though gooseberry, green melon, and a trace of kumquat are also in the mix, and there's pepper in there too. But ultimately the peat holds out and brings up the finish. 
      		
 
			
 
Brian Kinsman’s new creation was inspired by their founder William Grant, with a remit to create a malty blend of character. Digestive biscuits, malt, honeycomb, and confectioner’s chocolate melted over a bain-marie. It’s a satisfyingly rich dram, well-structured with a great mouthfeel that wanes with natural dilution. Banoffee pie, caramel biscuits, and maltiness deepen to flavors of coffee bean and molasses, leaving a teeth-coating finish of black coffee. (
 £18
      		
 
			
 
Another MGP/LDI-sourced rye, which KGB Spirits then ages additionally at their Alcalde, New Mexico site; it’s tagged as a 15 year old whiskey. An oaky, sweet nose with hot cereal notes. The tongue impact is breathtaking: a hot, thick slam of spice, mint, and wood that cools to a long, sweet mint finish. A bit of water tames it a bit and brings out more oaky notes and more sweetness. Powerful stuff.
      		
 
			
 
A 2 year old bourbon made from Texas-grown white corn. It sports a dusty nose full of dry corn and oaky spice. The whiskey is big-boned, juicy and sweet, but with a bitter streak of wood running through it. The finish confirms the youth of the whiskey as it flames in a long, hot wind-up. Some very interesting components here, waiting for better integration. 
      		
 
			
 
One of the challenges we face with new whisky is that it is evolving quickly, and while we understand that, it's hard to keep up. But the upside is we have shorter memories and that means life's easier for the likes of Old Hobart. A year ago this malt was two-dimensional, overly sweet, and definitely a work in progress. The change is remarkable. Now it's balanced, the sherry and sweetness are in order, and the sappiness has retreated. A$130
-> On page 183 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
What a pleasant change: a world whisky America can get hold of and Europe can't. This is a tiny French single malt whisky launched first in the U.S. This is very good, with honey, date, liquid chocolate, honeycomb, and some spice bite. But it's also very unusual, and my warning lights have come on: Brenne is released in single casks, so they vary dramatically. It's made by a French cognac maker.  
      		
 
			
 
Custard creams, lemon peel, and clotted cream create easygoing aromas on this drop from the mighty Edinburgh grain distillery. The palate moves rapidly through flavors of lemon cake and lime zest, to grapefruit sharpness and fresh pineapple, reaching a plateau of sherbet and tangerine. Like a bulldog chewing a wasp, there’s lip-puckering sharpness throughout, though it’s judiciously dosed with sufficient sweetness to counterbalance it. A great introduction to the delights of the single grain category. (117 bottles) £48
      		
 
			
 
Crystal clear and colorless. Somewhat rich for unaged corn spirit: corn, baked apple, grass, and a very light honeysuckle syrup. Quite mellow on the tongue; sweet, but with a drying finish of baked grain, sweet dried grass, and finally, just a hint of heat high in the mouth. A pleasant little glass.
      		
 
			
 
If you've ever tasted Connemara peated whiskey, you'll recognize this. As you'd expect for an Irish whiskey, it's sweet, with overripe apples and some pureed, almost creamy, pear. But that's all offset by a sooty, burned-dust smokiness and some gentle spice. It's quite soft and easy-drinking, and the taste is never less than interesting. But these days, it's up against some stiff competition. 
      		
 
			
 
At the moment, this is only available through Suntory’s Whisky Shops ‘W’ in Osaka and Tokyo, but as these act as mini-testing outlets, this grain whisky is one that should be noted. The nose is buttery and needs water to allow a flow of fudge, orange peel, crème brûlée, and green banana. It’s a bit like an alcohol-laced Danish. In the mouth there’s chewy toffee-cream sweetness offset by tart red fruits. A lovely, poised grain. ¥3,150
      		
 
			
 
Arguably the world’s most improved whisky, Limeburners is unrecognizable from the fledgling releases of a few years back. This is matured in 100-liter American oak barrels and finished in port. It is big and rich in flavor, with oily fruit and floral notes, a trace of young green barley, and menthol, licorice, and spicy cardamom. Australian whisky is a tidal wave starting to swell. It has some way to travel, but when it strikes it'll be huge. A$130
      		
 
			
 
In the Straits of 
resund, between Denmark and Sweden, sits the beautiful island of Hven. This is the first in a series of seven whiskies to mark the brightest stars of the Big Dipper asterism. Candied peel, walnut shells, warm marmalade, vanilla pods, and haylofts intermingle before Red Delicious apples shoulder in. It’s a lively, youthful dram of baked orange, milk chocolate, and vanilla tablet with a touch of pear. Best neat, as water subtracts from the experience. €90
      		
 
			
 
A very different whisky to its unaged namesake, and most unlike any of the other blends tasted for this issue. That’s no bad thing.
This is less sweet than most blends, with tobacco leaf and ashtray to the fore, and a dusty, grainy note with a touch of oak, grape skin, and sweet heather. That said, not a lot of evidence of the 12 years in cask.
      		
 
			
 
A straightforward bourbon with no flaws. Nicely balanced flavors of fruit (mandarin, apricot, pineapple), gentle sweetness  (honey, vanilla, caramel), and soft spice (cinnamon, mint). Gentle finish. Nice enough to drink straight in a pinch, but it comes across as more of a mixing bourbon to me.
      		
 
			
 
Distilled from a 10%, 70 IBU barleywine from Blue Point Brewing on Long Island. I’m smelling light pine hop notes, dried spruce plank, and heavy fudge; a muddled, heavy nose. Much better in the mouth: the fudge is restrained, the spruce and hops bring a lightness and verve to things. Not the “single malt” you might be expecting, but very much American craft distilling; like nothing else, intriguing, bold, a bit young, and with a lot of promise. Price is per 375 ml.
-> On page 184 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Sourced whiskey, moved to used bourbon barrels, then finished in barrels that held their Pine Barrens whiskey (also reviewed this issue). Pine sap, sweet juicy berries, and oak aromas; had to re-nose to be sure on that pine. Mouth is relatively smooth, much more so than the Rough Rider bourbon. Picking up some of that Pine Barren fudge, and a touch of rye grassiness. Finish is warm and spicy. A nice young rye.
      		
 
			
 
Just four years ago, two Barrys—Stein and Bernstein—opened the doors of Still Waters distillery on
the northern edge of Toronto. Distinct notes of poached pears, marzipan, flaky halva, and cinnamon apple pie embellish sweet ripe cherries, nutmeg, and a vague earthiness. Oatmeal, dry grain, and hot pepper combine on a sweet, polished palate. C$100
      		
 
			
 
Luscious sweet maltiness underlies a breadth of flavor that belies this whisky’s youth. Hints of acetone, green fruit, and hard pears joust playfully with earthy tones and elements of blue clay. Vague references to mulled red wine center around fleeting cinnamon sticks, ripe red fruit, and the grainy bitterness of buckwheat honey. Rich in grain and grasses, the palate is sweet, oily, and very spicy. Bottling at 46% and not chill filtering should please the anoraks. (
C$70
      		
 
			
 
Ellington has the creamy, sweet, and ultra-smooth mouthfeel down pat. Canada likes its mixing whisky to bite a little, but America prefers a silky smooth glide right down the gullet. Ellington Reserve certainly delivers with its rich, almost oily aura that springs to life with spicy-hot white pepper and newly-split clean firewood. Caramel and brown sugar underscore distinct notes of perfumed, candy-coated licorice amidst fragrant orange blossoms and flat lemon-lime soda. C$17
      		
 
			
 
I have a soft spot for the Braes: not only a forgotten part of Speyside, but the only distillery whose roof I’ve stood on. Anyway, here you have yeastiness and a smell like just-baked, sugar-topped apple pie, the fruit cracking through warm pastry. Sweet, direct, and slightly nervy, Braes is never going to be a heavy hitter, but this is the ideal dram to conjure up fading memories of summer.
      		
 
			
 
How can you really compare this to a quality blend priced under $50? It's hard not to view this as a victory of style over substance, and I object to premium whiskies being just 40% ABV, but nevertheless this is excellently made and the blending of whiskies over 21 years is exemplary. It's rich and viscous with light peach and plum notes and a pleasant earthy base.
      		
 
			
 
Nose is thin and sweet, smelling of popped corn and a bit of oak and vanilla. Mellow and smooth in the mouth, with warm corn and corn syrup notes, more oak and vanilla, but nothing overpoweringly sweet; good balance. Some oak in the finish, a slight curl on the tongue that's not unpleasant. “Single Barrel,” but no barrel number given. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
“Aged less than 4 years.” Sharp new oak (this is 30-gallon barrel aged), with hot cinnamon and sugar in the nose. Dry, and a bit hot up front, but its wheat comes through in a smoother, sweeter middle and a gentle, warm finish where corn finally appears. No real flaws here; it could be better integrated, but it has a rough appeal.
      		
 
			
 
Rye grain, fresh-sawn wood, and a hint of brittle sugar. No corn here: the mashbill is rye, wheat, and malt. Bitter rye edge drives this into the palate, blowing open space for the smoother body to follow and briefly sweeten things up before the rye warp collapses in an oily, spicy, savory finish. Quite discreet and small-scale; this doesn't roar, it urges. Good, but it needs more breadth and wood depth to be great. (
      		
 
			
 
Another American single malt, from Colorado. A meaty, savory aroma, with molasses cookie and herbal cough drop underneath. Roughly sweet in the mouth, with hints of smoke and bitter chocolate, sweet orange and stewed apples, with a strong back note of anise. For all the strange name and really strange logo (antlers on a barrel?), this is not bad at all.
-> On page 185 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Amber. A thick nose with touches of fresh varnish and a little oiliness. Has some substance and weight and the heavy florals (lily, jasmine) typical of mature Craig, alongside toffee. The palate is ripe, juicy, and full, the cask adding a slight resinous edge. Appears slightly smoky. Becomes fleshy, even waxy, with water, and decidedly more elegant. The tannins are supple and some herbal notes emerge. It is at its best neat, or with water on the side. £80
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in June 1994, this example of Deanston was aged for 20 years in a refill butt, which ultimately yielded 188 bottles. Quite shy on the nose, a hint of starch, gentle malt, and ginger. Shows its true colors on the palate: relatively full-bodied and sweet, with peaches and over-ripe apricots. Softly spiced. The finish is lengthy and sweet, with cocoa powder and sprightly oak. £87
      		
 
			
 
Gordon & MacPhail’s 1996 Tomatin was matured in first-fill bourbon barrels. Malt, fruit fondant, black pepper, then late vanilla and fudge on the nose. Peaches and apricots on the palate, with vanilla and white pepper. The finish is spicy and medium in length, with lasting orchard fruits. £57
      		
 
			
 
While most Wemyss Malts’ releases are named after flavor descriptors, this one adopts a well-known Shakespearean reference. A sherry butt filled in 2002 gave an out-turn of 854 bottles. The nose offers toffee bonbons, coffee with condensed milk, and finally farmyard aromas. The palate is relatively sweet, with spicy sherry notes and contrasting mildly citric fruit, plus a slight earthiness. The finish is medium to long, with lingering spice and a carry-over of coffee from the nose. £57
      		
 
			
 
All four of these Catskill whiskeys are in exceptionally beautiful bottles. Pleasant, homey smell of furniture polish, dried mint and grass, golden syrup, and sweet dough, wrapped in a thin layer of oak. Brightly sweet, more mint and grass, some cashew richness, and an insistent singing thread of oak that broadens to the finish, where the sweet and the oak balance with a new note of melon. A bit of astringency at the end, but this is right decent whiskey. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
A few years ago, Broger branched out from 
 into whisky making in their Carl artisan still. This one is made from 100% Voralberg Riebel maize matured for four years before finishing in Sauternes casks from Château d’Yquem. There are pronounced sweet aromas, with kernels of cooked corn and potato scones. Fruity, clean-cut, and refreshing lemon sherbet and light butterscotch, but the sweetness is kept in check, even with a cream and sugar finish. A handsome introduction. €48
      		
 
			
 
The key smoke characteristic here comes from kilning the barley over beechwood. The resultant aromas conjure up sweet mash, charcoal sticks, slabs of fish from the smoker, and dilapidated casks warming in the sunshine by the shoreline. It’s been matured for over 3 years in French Limousin oak, and the taste runs sweet with peach, nectarine, and melon, through Seville orange, to mixed peel and taffy candy. A finish of dried fruits, with lingering smoke in the tail. €48
      		
 
			
 
This is big, bruising, beautiful whisky. It even 
 thick when you pour it. The dark, tawny liquid evokes mixed peel, rum, and raisin from the maturation in 
 sherry casks. Tipping in a mouthful unleashes a slick of dark bramble and black currant flavors over the tongue; chewy and weighty with thick tannins, it develops with burnished oak, fig, gingerbread, and dark spices, achieving a bitter riposte before it finally pitches over the back of the throat into oblivion. 795kr
      		
 
			
 
Bottle design looks like it came from a 1950s movie. Did bourbon smell like this then: cornbread and cinnamon, seasoned oak and a bare hint of cedar, sweet hot dough? Oily and lazy on the tongue, a pool of sweet corn fire, touched with the cinnamon. The wood is absent, but returns at the end with a grip on the tongue and palate. Another great whiskey for the money; great on the rocks, from a drawer in a private eye’s desk…
      		
 
			
 
You wouldn’t believe from the nose on this white whiskey that it’s nearly 50% alcohol. Sweet, fresh-milled cornmeal combines with slightly acidic and floral pear, with just a dash of yeast to form an inviting and approachable nose. On the palate it’s equally affable and well-balanced, with sweet corn, crisp pear, and white pepper spice. A nice long finish with a touch of cooling rounds off an expertly-crafted and enjoyable moonshine.
-> On page 186 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
The second whisky from this Canadian craft distillery is a blend of three barrels of 100 percent rye whisky. Maturation for 3½ years in once-used red wine barrels has integrated distinct ripe fruits into the spiciness of rye grain. Youth is obvious in the earthy, malty elements, and the peppery heat, and there are distinct suggestions of clean blue clay. Its full body, rich flavors, and the fruit-spice balance speak well for the future of whisky from 66Gilead. 
      		
 
			
 
Light gold. Fresh and lightly nutty/biscuity combined with a gently swelling aroma of fruit syrups, green grape, lime (or green) jelly babies, and Quetsch, with that nut flour underneath. The palate is similarly smooth, creamy, and upfront, with a decidedly acidic zing to the finish before the wood finally shows its presence. A soft, delicious whisky that ticks all the right boxes but doesn’t really set the world alight. (2,700 bottles)
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in 1985, this expression of Highland Park was matured in a single bourbon cask that yielded 252 bottles. Green apples, tinned mandarin oranges, linseed, and a hint of smoky chocolate on the nose. Sweet spices, coconut, and mild peat smoke on the light palate. Lingering peat smoke, root ginger, and a touch of vanilla in the medium-length finish. £120
      		
 
			
 
At this age, there are more linear displays of fruit and sweetness than the 8 year old. Behind the 
, butterscotch, light pepper, and wood spice is a green, verdant nose of wet foliage and public lawns in the morning mist. It has a light to medium-weight texture of sugary butterscotch, strawberry, and raspberry developing around an oak and malt core. When the fruit flavor withers, there is a drop off in flavor, leaving a malty melee. £48
      		
 
			
 
Nose of sweet dried grass and cinnamon, echoed on the palate with supports of sweet, oaky vanilla. The finish develops some doughiness, then finally an oaky spice heat that lingers pleasantly, the most interesting part of the dram. Well-made (at Cedar Ridge, in Iowa) and clean, if not exceptionally complex. A good flask whiskey for a hike. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
There's big oak, caramel, cinnamon and clove spice, and fresh grain in the nose; not a shy, soft wheat whiskey at all. Good body, supporting spiciness, mint, and young oak; the small barrel punches, tempered by sweet grain and spice. Finish gets a bit dusty and astringent, crimping things. Wood-balanced, not dominated by it. Bold, dynamic.
      		
 
			
 
An odd non-age stated blend that uses a solera system to get a drop of the original 1958 blend into the mix. The blend is then finished for four years in 
 casks. It's a bit of blending gymnastics. Very sherry influenced, with marionberry jam, malt, salt, and oak. The integration and flavors are nice, but it all feels a bit muted. A medium length and dry finish shows off some of the younger spirit in the mix. (
)
      		
 
			
 
Master blender Graham Coull hand-selected a variety of aged stock and cask types for this new global addition to the Label 5 range. Vanilla, dark fruit, and gentle spices on the nose, but the appeal lies in the beautiful, clingy mouthfeel. Warm marmalade, nuts, and oak flavors with whispers of cinnamon and clove combine to produce a creamy, smooth dram. It builds and builds but never feels like it fully arrives. The finish is drying with dampened-down spices. €40
      		
 
			
 
Now that’s something you don’t see every day. Kings County (Brooklyn, N.Y.) used peat-smoked malt in this bourbon. The nose is bonfire and sweet juicy corn; the undiscovered Hebridean Isle of Kentucky? The smoke is less forward on the tongue; you don’t get so much a peaty bourbon as you get an unusually rich, broad young bourbon. More warming corn, digestive biscuits, and a pleasantly hot finish. Compelling, and…what kind of Manhattan would this make? 
Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Fruity on the nose and palate (orange peel, lime, lemon, pineapple). Very smooth and creamy, too, with notes of vanilla and a touch of honey. Underlying brittle mint, delicate floral notes, and even a hint of sandalwood gives the whisky some dimension. Very clean and nicely rounded. The problem with many Canadian whiskies is that they are too harsh when young, but get too woody when aged for ten or more years, because they are too thin in body to stand up to the oak. This one has matured nicely while still maintaining good balance and drinkability. 

-> On page 187 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Style: Single malt scotch (distillery not identified) Color: Deep gold Aroma: Floral (lavender, heather), honey, malty, delicately fruity (peaches, apricots, pears, citrus), with background spice (especially mint) Palate: Quite similar to its aroma. It starts slightly sweet, finishing pleasantly dry and subtly spicy. 

      		
 
			
 
This soft, bright, easy-going whisky is back in the U.S. after being absent for several years. Very fragrant, with vibrant fruit (nectarine, plum, guava, pineapple, clementine), honeyed vanilla, and subtle macadamia. Fairly light (a pre-dinner or leisurely afternoon malt, perhaps?), but evenly balanced. A gentle introduction to single malts for the blended scotch drinker. 
      		
 
			
 
A blend of three different single malts. Its name derives from the fact that the whisky is aged in American oak bodies with French Oak heads (a cross of both oaks). There’s no age statement, but the whiskies are all older than ten years. This is a gentle, subtly complex, somewhat lithe, easy drinking whisky (and with less oak spice than its predecessor, The Spice Tree). People think whisky is an after-dinner drink, but I think this would make a great aperitif because of its delicate dry spice notes and light body. I’m picking up evenly-proportioned notes of vanilla and coconut, with more subtle notes of clove, anise, and delicate fruit, all wrapped up in a gentle, malty body. A very versatile whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
A tribute this time from Edrington Group in the form of this one-off blend of The Famous Grouse. The sherried element seems to have been upped as it shows lavish amounts of dark chocolate, black cherry, and a little treacle, with some orange peel and, with water, raspberry and heather.  The palate shows a hint of smoke and builds through rich flavors to a toffee-accented finish. Subtle and long. £25
      		
 
			
 
Described as “an exotic mix of bananas, mango, pitaya, pineapples, guava, passion fruit, and raisins, all balanced perfectly by deep charred peaty notes.” It sort of is, but this isn't a soft, silky smooth dessert whisky; it's Rod Stewart singing Air Supply's “All Out Of Love.” It's soft and gentle, but the gravel may put off the softies, and it's far too bland to appeal to fans of Maggie May. Between a rock and a hard place.
      		
 
			
 
Pleasingly aromatic and floral, with lively fruit, fresh cereal grain, honey and vanilla cream. Subtle grassy, hay notes add complexity. A very friendly whisky, conjuring up images of a sunny afternoon in Spring. 

      		
 
			
 
In terms of bang for your buck this has always been one of the very best blends, punching well above its weight. Whether you feel the same about this revamped version depends on how much you want a peat punch. Previously rough and gutsy, this is softer, with more licorice and treacle but also more younger sappiness. Smoke has the last say but it's like an aging sportsman, replacing energy and attitude with guile and subtlety.
      		
 
			
 
The follow-up to 81 proof Wild Turkey bourbon—and part of a continuing trend by distillers to release versatile whiskey: reasonably priced, no age statement, that will stand out in cocktails but can be enjoyed on its own in a pinch. Very spicy, yet relatively soft in character, with suggestions of gin botanicals, dried fruits, honeyed vanilla, and teasing charred oak. Very quaffable for a rye whiskey. 
      		
 
			
 
Much darker in color than the Classic bottling (also reviewed this issue), as is expected. The nose warns of a wood-whelmed whiskey: dark, bitter wood notes, with a caramel underlay. The mouth is much hotter than the Classic bottling, with bold oak spice in the front and a gooey caramel/toffee sweetness underneath…only it’s not as good as that sounds. It’s all rather one-dimensional, including the hot oak finish. An interesting lesson in wood, but not at $200 for the pair.
      		
 
			
 
Gentle in personality and predominantly sweet, with notes of honeyed vanilla, caramel, maple syrup, coconut cream pie, and a hint of red licorice. Underlying bright fruit, suggestions of green tea, and a dusting of cinnamon keep the whiskey lively and upbeat. A soft, toasted oak finish tames the sweetness and provides balance. The whiskey is more approachable and easier to drink than a typical bourbon containing rye-the spicy rye intensity isn’t there. Some bourbon enthusiasts will miss the challenge-and rewards-that the rye would normally provide. For this reason, this whiskey will be more appealing to drinkers of wheated bourbons (e.g., Maker’s Mark, Old Fitzgerald, W.L. Weller). It is an interesting change of pace from the standard bourbon fare, and it is a unique exploration of American whiskey without sacrificing authenticity. 

-> On page 188 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Placed in a new barrel after 8 years and 8 months. Very spicy with an oak sappiness. Loads of maple syrup and corn sweetness up front, with the spice and some subtle lush fruit kicking in mid-palate. Leather and tobacco follow through to a very masculine, dry oak finish. While a very enjoyable whiskey, the dominant, hot, and lingering oak on the finish keeps me from scoring it as high as its siblings. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in Zinfandel barrels for eight years after spending ten years in new charred oak. Quite similar in flavor profile, but with more oak influence (as would be expected) when compared to its younger brother. The oak spices and resinous textures are more prominent on the nose and palate in this whiskey, and they linger on the finish, which ultimately becomes slightly leathery and tannic. Still, an entertaining, intriguing whiskey. (But read between the lines-buy the younger expression.) 

      		
 
			
 
Light and airy on the nose, and delicately creamy on the palate. Gently sweet personality, with caramel custard, vanilla bean, candy corn, and crème brulee. Shows more oak on the palate than the nose, with increasing dried spice notes on the finish. A peculiar whiskey, if not overly complex or inspiring.Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
There’s a reason why bourbon distillers don’t char their barrels to this intensity. Aged over 15 years, this is a bold whiskey, with lovely honeyed fruit and creamy vanilla on the nose and palate. But it’s bullied by the charred oak, brandishing oak tannins and leather, along with background tobacco and over-roasted nuts. Dry, charred oak finish. There’s a lovely sweetness that does challenge all this charred oak, but it eventually loses the battle. Price is per 375ml.
      		
 
			
 
A soft, delicate bourbon -- especially when compared to its single barrel siblings here. Subtle notes of candied fruit and creamy sweet notes (vanilla, coconut, light toffee, and caramel corn) are nicely interwoven. Some integrated, gently-dried spice dances throughout and lingers on the finish. An easy-to-embrace bourbon with nice balance.
      		
 
			
 
The new, younger sibling to George T. Stagg. George T.’s signature is its bold nature and high proof, and Junior follows in its footsteps. The aromas are very nice: bold spice (clove, dusty mint, cinnamon, evergreen) with layers of burnt sugars, cocoa, charred oak, and berried fruit. However, on the palate, those sugars become dominated by aggressive spice, leather, and unnecessary tannin, most notably on the finish. Spend a little more and opt for George T. Stagg instead 
      		
 
			
 
The most aggressive of the bunch, with the wood playing a dominant role. Toffee, rummy molasses, roasted nuts, barrel char, leather, tobacco, and a wisp of smoke.
      		
 
			
 
Clean and uncomplicated bourbon. Creamy sweet layers of vanilla, caramel, and toffee are underpinned by soft citrus fruit, gentle mint, teaberry, and delicate oak. Here’s a bourbon certainly good enough to drink on its own, but you won’t feel guilty throwing it in a mixed drink. Nice for everyday drinking. 

      		
 
			
 
One of the biggest Birthday Bourbons to date. This whiskey was aged on the top corner of a warehouse where the temperature extremes are at their greatest. The greater the temperature extreme, the greater the impact of the barrel. The wood is immediately noticeable on the nose and palate-there are plenty of concentrated dried spice notes throughout. Dried vanilla, mint, fiery cinnamon, cedar, and assorted fruits are sweetened and calmed by notes of maple syrup and toffee. Until about mid-palate, that is. Then, another wave of dried spices kicks in, remaining through the finish. For serious bourbon drinkers. 

      		
 
			
 
A very hearty Birthday Bourbon. Richly textured with lush sweet notes of jammy berried fruit, coconut cream pie, and apple crisp, married with firm dry notes of fresh mint, warming cinnamon, and vanilla. Dry, polished leather finish. The oak-influenced dryness on the finish lingers longer than I would like, and the flavors aren’t integrated as well as last year’s version (which is understandable, given that last year’s release was 
 magazine’s American Whiskey of the Year). This is certainly an entertaining whisky. Save it for after dinner, though.

-> On page 189 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Ardmore is a rising star in the world of single malt. Until four years ago it was little known in its own right, its main purpose being as a key malt in Teacher’s. Then Ardmore Traditional was released, and it’s been winning over drinkers ever since. That malt is a delicatessen whisky: smoky, oily, and savory, a unique Highland malt with much to recommend it. This is a different proposition altogether. It’s clean and sweet, with pineapple candy, dusty and almost incense-like spices, and a liberal dose of sweet peat. Some citrus notes, too. The peat holds out until the end with impressive effect. There’s talk of this becoming a permanent part of the Ardmore portfolio. Let’s hope so: it’s further proof that Ardmore is a very interesting distillery indeed. (Travel Retail and selected specialist whisky shops.) 
      		
 
			
 
Rich, good body, blueberry muffin, black cherry, a lot of tannic grip (perhaps a little too much for balance). Not as polished as the Pomerol or Madeira.
      		
 
			
 
A very textural whisky. Incredibly creamy, with mouth-coating vanilla, honeyed barley, hay, linseed oil, clementine, and subtle peach. The whisky continues to cling to the palate long after the finish. It’s what you would expect Auchentoshan to taste like, but bolder. A nice whisky, but lacking the polish of the standard 21 year old expression. 

      		
 
			
 
American Oak is new to the Auchentoshan core range in 2014 and is the first release from this Lowland distillery to be matured solely in first-fill bourbon casks. An initial note of rosewater, then Madeira, vanilla, developing musky peaches, and icing sugar. Spicy fresh fruit on the palate, chili notes, and more Madeira and vanilla. The finish is medium in length, and spicy to the end.
      		
 
			
 
The tell-tale rich honeyed Balvenie personality is spiced up by finishing it off in new charred oak casks, making a normally masculine whisky even bigger. The honeyed malt impacts the palate first, with intermediate notes of citrus fruit, followed by dried spices (cinnamon, vanilla, ginger, and cocoa). The new oak impact is most evident on the whisky’s long, dry, spicy finish. A nice whisky, but perhaps a tad too much new oak for greatness? 

      		
 
			
 
Good, straightforward, moderately sherried Balvenie. Classic honeyed notes combine with vanilla, ripe barley, glazed citrus, apricot marmalade, cinnamon, and nutmeg. A nice entry level Balvenie, a solid effort. 

      		
 
			
 
Very fruity and spicy. High, bright fruit notes of lemon, mandarin, and mango, with a sprinkling of ginger and powdered vanilla. Oak kicks in on the end, leading to a fairly dry finish, which is not surprising for a 30 year old whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Finished in a dark rum cask. Notes of peat, smoked mackerel, and suggestions of charcoal married with molasses, vanilla wafer, golden raisin, cantaloupe, and a dollop of honey. It’s missing the more defined fruit notes that the other two have. I’d like to see this at 15 years to give it more depth. 

      		
 
			
 
In the same genre as BenRiach 12 year old reviewed below, but more concentrated, with additional notes of resinous oak, light toffee, and soft caramelized pear. 

      		
 
			
 
Lovely golden honey color. Lush and sweet (the Sauternes impact is obvious), with honey-drenched apricot, sultana, and lemon gum drops. Vanilla, candied nuts, and subtle botanicals round out the palate. Decent oak grip on the finish keeps the whisky from being too cloying.

-> On page 190 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
A venerable bottling from its proprietor, and there’s no doubt from the nose that you’re dealing with an ultra-mature whisky. Like going in to meet your aged grandfather who is sitting in his library surrounded by old books, with a little sunlight filtering through the drapes. In time, there’s dried peach and envelope gum. The palate is wooded and concentrated, but it is dry and lacking in the required energy. Water stirs it into life, but kills the flavor. £450
      		
 
			
 
The only distillery-approved bottling of Bladnoch in the United States. When compared to the Gordon & MacPhail bottling above, this one isn’t as sweet or creamy in texture. There’s more citrus fruit and a drier, spicier finish. This one is also bolder and a bit more aggressive. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged for six years in bourbon casks, then aged an additional ten years in Bordeaux wine casks. Classic Bowmore peat smoke and red berried fruit (raspberry, strawberry) are the main components of this whisky, with additional notes of plum, grape skin tannins, currant, caramel, and marzipan. Good grip from the Limousin oak (wine casks). Some brine and damp cellar notes emerged occasionally, with the smoke lingering long on the finish.

      		
 
			
 
Aged in a used bourbon barrel. Rather soft for Bowmore — especially for its age — with a gentle foundation of honey, vanilla, and malt. Interwoven notes of summer fruit, coconut, lime, and gentle peat, with teasing brine and smoke on the finish. A straightforward, unpretentious, pleasant Bowmore. 
      		
 
			
 
Finished in Madeira casks. An interesting contrast to the 15 year old. This one is more challenging than soothing (and quite dry too -- especially on the palate), with dominant red fruit (currant, raspberry, strawberry), plum, baked cinnamon apple, polished leather, bourbon, almonds, and just the hint of smoke and brine. Dry, resinous finish. An intense Laddie.
      		
 
			
 
A departure from the first edition of Bruichladdich 20 year old, and very Glenmorangie-esque-given that it was aged for five weeks in Mourvedre wine casks before being bottled. The wine influence is evident, both in appearance (a pinkish hue), its palate (berry fruits), and even its nickname ("flirtation"). It is quite a sweet Bruichladdich, with chewy toffee, ripe berries, background pit fruits, and earthy/ resinous spicy notes-especially on the finish. A Bruichladdich fresh Islay sea breeze character fights its way through, but it is a struggle. 

      		
 
			
 
A very fruity “Laddie,” flowing with tangerine, apricot, pineapple and pear. Background notes of honey, vanilla, and a wisp of smoke. The typical Bruichladdich fresh, appetizing, brine notes are restrained, emerging ever so subtly on the finish. Nicely rounded and clean throughout. 

      		
 
			
 
A replacement to the original 10 year old, which is now off the market. A clean, straightforward dram with a lightness and freshness which is very inviting. Notes of vanilla cream, light caramel, tropical fruit (coconut, pineapple), clementine, pear, and a hint of currant. Appetizing, subtly briny finish.

      		
 
			
 
Finished in a rum cask. Gold with a greenish tinge. Notes of ripe barley, demerara sugar, toasted marshmallow, and sultana, with underlying vanilla and subtle brine emerging on the finish. A pleasant, easy-going Laddie. (Bottled for Bayway World of Liquor)

      		
 
			
 
The 8
 in a series of “Links” releases. This one’s further enhanced in Chateau Latour Bordeaux casks. Bright, fruity notes of red raspberry, rhubarb, and candy apple. Teasing fresh brine emerges occasionally, along with citrus, mango, and vanilla. A very perky whisky. 

-> On page 191 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
The second bottling from Bruichladdich in this range shows the ‘traditional‘ side of a distillery that is famed for the variety of its expressions. This, in other words, is Bruichladdich in its sweet, honeyed, gentle guise partnered with American oak to produce a mashed banana character, an unctuous palate, and a light touch of almond on the finish. Lovely. £55 (500 ml)
      		
 
			
 
Our second Bunna’, this is pale of hue with a surprising hint of salinity alongside a whiff of lemon sherbet, and an aroma like wet linen, while a floury maltiness runs below. Age however has twisted the fruits into the verge of musty over-ripeness. It’s explosive and spicy and, even though this is only 46%, it is hot. Water picks up the acidity before there’s a huge hit of warming ginger as the kiss-off.  £89
      		
 
			
 
Very chewy. Think of melting Mars bars, with a touch of coconut cream, then red-fruit acidity, red cherry, and lemon. All very forward and sweet, but with no alcohol when neat, showing an active cask. Dilute, there’s coconut, pea shoots, and banoffie pie. The palate is thick with Jaffa cake (orange and chocolate), then nutty granola. It doesn’t take water too well. Quite fat. £50/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
One of a series of single cask, wine-finished Caol Ilas. This one is finished in a claret (Bordeaux) wine cask. The claret adds some bright red fruit notes (raspberry, red currant) and red licorice to accompany the smoke, brine, olive, and vanilla-laced malt. I have tasted some claret/Bordeaux wood-finished whiskies where the wine was too dominant, but this one achieves a nice balance. 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Speyside single malt scotch Color: Pale gold Aroma: Surprisingly fresh and clean. Golden raisins, lightly oaky. Malted barley. Palate: Beautifully balanced and clean. Layers of fruit interwoven through a richly malty foundation. Long and clean on the finish with a hint of dry oaky spiciness. 

      		
 
			
 
Very pale in color, suggesting it was aged in a used bourbon cask. One nosing confirms it. A fairly light, fresh, and appetizing whisky, with notes of brine, mustard seed, and delicate honeyed vanilla. Slightly oily in texture. Seaweed, with suggestions of ginger and bourbon on the finish. An aperitif whisky, or with sushi perhaps? (Bottled exclusively for Binny’s Beverage Depot.) 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in bourbon and sherry casks, and then finished off in oloroso sherry casks for two years. The sherry provides a good measure of lush fruit, brown sugar, and a slick texture on the palate. The sherry is clean and uncluttered, if somewhat overshadowing the traditional Deanston honeyed malt foundation. I’m also picking up some burnt marmalade, lemongrass, and ginger. Soft, sweet, fruity, finish. 

      		
 
			
 
A mouth-coating -- almost chewy -- Glen Elgin, chock full of toffee, nut paste, heather-honey, and a hint of milk chocolate. The richness is brightened with ginger and mandarin orange, making for a pleasurable, soothing experience.
      		
 
			
 
I don’t normally like to add water to old whiskies, but this one needs a little at this strength. Whether you will like this whisky or not depends on whether you like woody whiskies with lots of sherry, and whether you care at all about recognizing the distillery character. The flavors are nicely balanced, rich, and very soothing in nature, but I struggle to find Glen Grant in here. Ripe fallen fruit, chewy toffee, maple syrup, honey-glazed almonds, damp oak resins-it’s all there, and it’s all balanced and quite entertaining. I personally want to taste the distillery character in my whisky. If that didn’t matter to me, I would have given this whisky a higher score. 

      		
 
			
 
Like many older Glen Grant offerings, this one is from a sherry cask. The sherry, and the long oak aging, transforms what is normally a light and easy drinking whisky to a more serious affair. Ripe, heavy fruit dominate the palate-the sherry is very evident here, but it is not cloying. It’s quite nutty too, along with polished oak and toffee. The oak balances the sherry notes very nicely, and the whisky is clean and uncomplicated throughout, all the way through to its finish. 

-> On page 192 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
As this is slightly closed when neat, you have to search for Glen Grant’s classic apple notes behind a tense nose which, even with water, remains inward-looking. Thankfully, this changes on the tongue with pure, very linear (typical of GG) flavors of cool mint, cucumber, basil, and yes, apple. Easy-going from a relaxed cask, but with more substance than you’d expect.
      		
 
			
 
 Finish has spent 16 months gaining additional maturation in 
 casks. The use of sherry wood has lent the nose a greater sweetness, with vanilla, dates, apples, and cinnamon. Floral, spicy notes, with toffee, ginger, and sweet sherry on the palate, giving extra body and resonance. The fruity finish is of medium length, with mixed spices and white pepper. £45
      		
 
			
 
A 22 year old Glencadam; maturation took place in a refill American oak hogshead. The nose offers rich honey and malt notes, though slightly balsamic. Syrup-like on the palate, heathery and spicy, with more honey. Relatively long and spicy in the finish, with chili, though honey persists right to the end. 
      		
 
			
 
An interesting whisky, with flavor notes I wouldn’t normally find together-golden raisins, green grapes, plum, citrus tang, fresh ginger, almonds, and a hint of mint leaves, all wrapped by a pleasing maltiness with underlying notes of vanilla custard. Fairly dry, slightly hot finish. Many of the Glendronachs (especially from the distillery) are sherried. Some of the sherried versions, like the 33 year old, are excellent. However, this is a refreshing change of pace. I’m glad they bottled it when they did though, as any additional oak dryness would be detrimental. 

      		
 
			
 
This whisky is doddery and on the edge, bordering on feeble. You have to look hard to find its spark and fire, but if you search for it, it is there. The nose is light and savory, with crushed fall leaves and chestnut on the nose. On the palate, there are traces of licorice stick, a touch of cumin, anise, and a creamier, less bitter chocolate note than some other samples. It finishes with traces of mandarin, but overall the sun is setting and the spirited and energetic man of old seems to be getting bitter. Overall, though, still pretty impressive for its age. £380 
      		
 
			
 
This is the most seasonal of this batch of GlenDronachs, with a nose of rich stewed prunes and fermenting fruit in an orchard at harvest time. There is some anise and cherry lozenge in the mix, too, and the palate is complex, with plums, stewed fruits, and damson jam. The finish is drying, dusty, and spiky. £80 
      		
 
			
 
Clean, fragrant, and quite fruity, with notes of tangerine, lemon, pineapple, and kiwi. There's a creamy-almost oily-vanilla maltiness on the palate that binds the fruit together. Gently dry, subtly spicy finish. A pleasing, unpretentious whisky.
      		
 
			
 
Second of this pair of limited editions from Glenfiddich. This was named after a number of the distillery’s warehouse roofs collapsed under the weight of snow in 2010. This was a bottling of a selection of casks — ex-sherry, ex-bourbon, refill — from one of those damaged warehouses. It is gentle and sweet — cooked pear, fruit crumble topped with rolled oats, golden syrup, and on the palate hints of raisin. A lemon finish adds a freshness to a dangerously drinkable dram. 
      		
 
			
 
A 15 year old Glen Garioch which is unique as the first from the distillery to be fully matured in French Bordeaux wine casks. The casks in question are 
 from Saint-Julien, and distillation took place on June 23, 1998. Just 450 cases are available globally. Sweet berries on the early nose, with milk chocolate, ginger, and spicy oak. Malt, ginger, plums, and honey on the rich palate, while the long finish offers spicy malt and honey.
      		
 
			
 
Very frail. Don’t add any water to this whisky, as its flavors seem to crumble. It’s a subtle whisky too -- one has to tease the flavors out of it. But when you do, with some focus, you’ll find fragrant notes of dried spice, malty vanilla, citrus peal, and elegant floral notes. Surprisingly, the whisky is not overly dry and woody on the palate. The initial impression of this whisky is that it’s too tired and past its prime. With continued exploration and patience, its subtle pleasures emerge.
-> On page 193 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Glenkinchie goes from 10 to 12 years old. I think the two years have done it good. It’s deeper, more complex, with better flavor development. Notes of fresh cut grass, vanilla, bright lemon, and cinnamon, with a soft malt underbelly. So many people (myself included) would rather have seen Rosebank as the Lowland representative of the Classic Malts than Glenkinchie. But this is a step towards bridging the gap. 

      		
 
			
 
Its deep amber/ruby color suggests a lot of sherry, and one whiff confirms. The whisky is rich and sappy in texture, with lush notes of ripe sherry fruit balanced by dry, mature spicy oak. There’s a pleasant soothing texture to the whisky too, but I do struggle to find the subtle complexities which make some bottlings of Glenlivet so special. There’s just so much oak and sherry dominating. At its best after dinner or with a cigar. 

      		
 
			
 
A quintet of releases showing examples of The Glenlivet from five decades, issued to support The Glenlivet Generations 70 year old bottling. All are available individually or in a limited edition set (50 only) for £2,850; these bottlings are not currently available in the U.S.

The youngest of the quintet has been aged in refill sherry hogsheads, but the coconut that immediately assails the nostrils suggests they were made from American oak. Alongside this is the distillery’s signature pineapple note which sits under a scented, floral lift. Water adds a further layer of ripe pear. The palate is equally heightened with a powdery feel. It’s pretty discreet and I’d be cautious with any dilution. The finish is a mix of night-scented stocks, custard, and green apple. £95 
      		
 
			
 
Bottling of a large package of 12 butts and 30 hoggies dating from 1972. The nose is slightly closed initially, but shows good mature distillery character: old apple, potpourri, more raspberry, and furniture polish. The palate is a little dry, with humidor and light chocolate, but needs water to bring out the fruit-sugar sweetness. It’s good, but that low bottling strength has sapped it of the energy which is vital for old whiskies. 
      		
 
			
 
A typical Rothes nose, with vanilla, granola, apple, Brazil nut, lemon, and
low-level sweet spices mixing with lightly oxidized fruits. That said, it needs
water, especially for the palate, where the malty crispness of the undiluted
taste is replaced by something more considered, darkly fruity and gently spicy;
coriander is uppermost. All in all, this is Rothes in very approachable rather
than dynamic guise. One for a lazy afternoon.
      		
 
			
 
Pleasant aroma (subtle, but with nice depth), with notes of honeyed lime, kiwi, chopped nuts, chocolate fudge, and gentle, seasoned tobacco. Everything is working nicely on the palate too, with a similar flavor profile (the nuts now being roasted) and some smoldering smoke, until about mid-palate, when its age becomes evident with some wet wood notes blending in the mix through to the finish. (Exclusive to Virginia ABC.) 

      		
 
			
 
Named after the Viking chieftain whose exploits are central to the Orkneyinga Saga, Svein is the least typically Highland Park of the initial three Warrior releases. The nose is oily, with starch and ozone, then ultimately freshly-squeezed orange and lemon juice. The palate offers a suggestion of smoke, sawdust, and vanilla. Nutty and slightly peppery in the finish, with just a suggestion of peat. €40/liter
      		
 
			
 
The news that there’s a new distillery being built on the Imperial site is something to be celebrated. One hopes that the new plant makes whisky of the same character as the old, because Imperial is a classic single malt which is about fragrance (here pineapple and toasted marshmallows) and a clinging, seductive, cream soda quality. Whiskies like these are poems, they need you to concentrate. This is a touch rigid, but that’s a minor criticism of a gorgeous dram.  £60
      		
 
			
 
Typically pale and slightly broader than in previous years, with a little more fleshiness that rubs alongside squid ink and white pepper. Huge smoke mingles with the sharp tang of brine and a touch of bran. Water brings out lanolin. There’s little oak getting in the way of the distillery character here and while water settles the waves, it just doesn’t have the extra dimension that elevates the decent to the great. It does make a great highball tho’. (31,428 bottles)
      		
 
			
 
Tastes more mature than its age would suggest. It’s packed with ripe, sweet barley (especially at the palate entry). There are some high citrus fruit notes and anise that emerge before the signature Laphroaig peat smoke and tar wallops you. Very vibrant and youthful, but without being too green. A steal for $45. (A Binny’s Beverage Depot exclusive.) 

-> On page 194 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Tobermory’s peated offering. Great to see Ledaig hitting its stride, with a brisk punch of peat and not chill-filtered. There’s a bit of a raw edge too, quite bracing but still plenty of soothing sweetness. Earthy peat smoke, ripe barley, honeyed vanilla, bourbon barrel char, black licorice stick, espresso bean, olive brine, and suggestions of beef jerky. In some respects, it even tastes younger than 10 years old, but I’m balancing that with bonus points for distinctiveness. 
      		
 
			
 
Spicy and botanical on the nose, with notes of ginger, juniper, lemon grass, orange, and grapefruit rind. Similar follow-through on the palate, with added notes of vanilla, honeyed malt, and hay. Gentle, dried herb and spice finish. Certainly some interesting -- perhaps even peculiar -- flavors from this product of the demolished Lowland distillery.
      		
 
			
 
A catch-up rather than a new release, but a fascinating contrast to the 14 year old Flora & Fauna bottling. Yes, there’s apple blossom, but here there’s more medlar, fruit syrups, raspberry, and an intriguing play between vanilla and lightly oxidized nuttiness. Linkwood’s substance is shown on the palate, where an oily feel adds texture to the lush dried fruits and saffron-led spiciness. Best neat. An elegant dram.  
      		
 
			
 
Matured in a refill hogshead, the out-turn was 262 bottles. The nose is malty, with the oiliness of figs, plus dates and tinned peaches. Supple on the palate, with vanilla, honey, and spicy resin notes. The finish is medium in length, warming, and slightly herbal, with nutmeg and malt. £90
      		
 
			
 
Antique gold color. Fruity aroma with delicate notes of spice (anise, eucalyptus). More fruit on the palate-soft in texture and gently sweet-with interwoven fresh spice notes and a pleasing rounded finish. A gentle, medium-bodied dram. 

      		
 
			
 
A combination of 6, 10, and 14 year old Longrow. I was concerned that there would be too much young whisky in here (like there was with the Springbank C.V. several years ago), but this isn’t the case. Youthful? Yes. Immature? No. A Longrow with an attitude. Creamy, sweeter vanilla notes up front, with kiln smoke, sea-soaked stone, tar, anise, chocolate fudge, and apricot. I would like to see more of the older whisky in here, because it leans towards the young side, but it is still a vibrant, enjoyable whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
A nicely clean Longmorn, expressing floral notes (especially violets) and bright fruit (lemon, lime, cantelope, plums), supported interwoven notes of honey, rich malt, bread pudding, dates and vanilla. The classic Longmorn viscosity is there, and this thickness is tamed by a very pleasing spicy, dry oak finish, with a hint of salt. I could drink this stuff anytime. G&M’s move to 46% has certainly benefited this whisky. (Bottled exclusively for Binny’s Beverage Depot.) 

      		
 
			
 
Longmorn is one of Speyside’s fruit bombs, something which remains true here, even if in slightly paler guise than usual. Instead of ripe autumn fruits, here you get kiwi, William pear, green plum, even green tomato, and a faint blossom reminiscent of the almond notes of 
 (cherry blossom). I’d keep water well away, such is this light, lacy Longmorn’s fragility. £73
      		
 
			
 
Aged in a refill butt, and very pale in color. Very fragrant -- fruity and spicy -- with notes of vanilla, lemongrass, ginger, sultana, citrus zest, key lime, and green grapes. There’s a floral component, too (rose petals?). A very delicate Macallan, and quite suitable as an aperitif. (749 bottles produced.)
      		
 
			
 
A nicely honeyed malty foundation is balanced by fruit on the front of the palate, with a pleasingly dry, spicy finish. It would benefit by being bottled at 43%, like the older two expressions. It is simple, straight-forward, and unpretentious, as one would expect in a 10 year old whisky. 

-> On page 195 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Full gold. Oily in texture, with ripe barley, front-loaded toffee, honey-drenched citrus, fallen orchard fruit, and a full complement of spice (cinnamon, nutmeg, and clove). Gripping, resinous, slightly hot finish. The flavors don’t meld together here as well as the other three expressions, but it’s still a fun ride. (Price is per 1 litre). 

      		
 
			
 
With the hue of pigeon blood (a ruby, not a dead bird), initially this seems closed, but richness develops, mixing stewed Assam tea, chocolate biscuit, raisin, damson jam, and a whiff of tomato puree. The oak gives it the character of a Barolo Chinato. A knife and fork are needed to consume it, but for all the big tannins, there’s dark rose petal and the bittersweet edge of licorice. Dry, rich, and hermetic. For the hardcore sherry lover. 145 bottles.   
      		
 
			
 
Soft fruits are to the fore here; think of cooking green plums, fruit syrup, a hint of sultana to add to the sweetness, and then a hint of beeswax. There’s even a little of Macallan’s occasional earthiness, here akin to the damp sand floor of a sherry bodega. This is the transition point in the range with a similar weight to Gold but greater sweetness and the beginnings of Macallan’s mysterious savory edge. Have neat, with water, or ice. £45
      		
 
			
 
Clean with the warming, sensual aroma of yeasty freshness that you get from freshly-baked bread. Stir in some almond butter, a little hay. The palate shows that it has substance behind this very open nose. Here is thickness, tongue-clinging oils, and a vibrant lemon note bringing to mind boiled travel sweets, before the dry maltiness comes through. With water — and it’s best lightly diluted — we’re looking at pastries. £36
      		
 
			
 
Bottled at 350 ml as a pair with a Spanish oak version (and probably sold out at source), here you get the merest glimpse of Macallan’s meatiness (shepherd’s pie) before flowers and apple blossom take charge. Lifted, yes, but never delicate. Water brings out cereal and mealy pudding, with barley sugar on the end. £350 (one of two 350 ml bottles)
      		
 
			
 
The Darkness! series involves finishing in specially-made octave (50-liter) casks. This has positive Macallan character with some oil (putty even) and touches of malt and turned earth, but also a scented, cognac-like fruitiness with added spice. Water adds a little sherried cheesiness. The palate shows some nutty, oxidized flavors to begin with, but then in the middle the PX flumps onto the tongue, slowing and dampening the drive. Pleasant enough though. £110/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
One in a trio from Chivas Bros., who every year release limited editions of 500 ml cask strength bottlings from a selection of its estates. These are predominantly only for sale on site or by mail order through www.maltwhiskydistilleries.com.

Miltonduff was licensed in 1824, and these days is also an important blender’s malt with a little more oily depth than its neighbor, Glenburgie. This has a deep floral bouquet — think iris and lily — and aromatic fruits like quince. With water there’s moss, sage, and orange peel. The fruity character is dominant in the mouth and becomes more tropical; there’s even some coconut on the finish. £40 
      		
 
			
 
Turns quite murky with water, but don’t let this scare you off. Fragrant and flowery on the nose. A sweet whisky with a honeyed malt and creamy vanilla foundation, a mélange of tropical fruit (mandarin, lime, pineapple), and soft oak on the finish. Pleasant enough, but I wish the flavors were crisper, cleaner, and more well-defined. (A Park Avenue Liquor exclusive.) 
      		
 
			
 
Lightweight, with a slightly oily texture. Appetizingly fresh and briny on the palate, with underlying notes of hay, lime, vanilla-tinged malt, and a hint of seaweed on the finish. A mouth-watering aperitif. 

      		
 
			
 
A marriage of whiskies from bourbon, sherry, and port casks, which does help give it some complexity. A bit fleshy on the nose (sooty peat, soy sauce, sherry, tannins). It calms down on the palate (and is soothed by the sherry notes), with some additional vanilla, bitter orange, and brine. More brine and warming pepper on the finish. There’s a lot going on here, which I like, but I’m not sure all the flavors dovetail with each other well enough to deserve a higher rating. 
-> On page 196 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
A new expression in the portfolio. Quite fruity, with prominent honey-tinged citrus peel, nutty toffee, nougat, and vanilla fudge, leading to a gripping, firm, dry oak resin finish. Deeper and bolder than the 12 year old expression. 
      		
 
			
 
This Highlander is Lowland-ish in style, but with more heft. There’s soft barley sweetness, notes of vanilla and orange creamsicle. Grassy notes emerge from time to time. It is clean and very drinkable. An ideal aperitif, but could be enjoyed anytime between dawn and dinner. Whoever said whisky was an after-dinner drink never tasted this whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
John Black is the veteran master distiller at Tullibardine distillery, and this is the sixth release to bear his name. The single malt in question was matured in bourbon barrel #10,002. Lemonade, dough, and maple on the nose. Progressively more floral, parma violets, pear drops, a hint of cinnamon, and milk chocolate in time. Hazelnuts and allspice on the palate, while citrus fruits emerge, plus more milk chocolate and a suggestion of cloves. Medium length, with nuts and oak.  £115
      		
 
			
 
Tullibardine 228 Burgundy is finished in red Burgundy casks from Chateau de Chassagne Montrachet, the home of Maison Michel Picard, which owns Tullibardine distillery. The nose features charred oak, vanilla, milk chocolate-covered Turkish Delight, and mild, sweet chili. Sweet and spicy on the nutty palate, with eating apples, cranberries, and a silky texture. Allspice and damsons in the lengthy finish. 
      		
 
			
 
Matured in first-fill bourbon casks for an unspecified period, Sovereign offers a nose that is floral with new-mown hay, vanilla, and soft fudge. Fruity on the palate, with milk chocolate, malt, and subtle cinnamon. Cocoa, vanilla, and more spice in the finish. Relatively uncomplicated but very drinkable. 
      		
 
			
 
A blend of straight bourbon and rye whiskeys. A younger-tasting expression when compared to High West’s original Bourye. Pleasant enough to drink neat or with a splash of water, but that certainly wouldn’t be my first choice. Sweet foundation (caramel, vanilla custard, candy corn), along with honeyed fruit, macadamia, cinnamon, nutmeg, and soft mint. Comes across as a bit confused at times, and the flavors aren’t always well defined.
      		
 
			
 
Floral aroma with a lively array of orchard fruit and citrus.  Underlying notes of soft honey and vanilla.  Good malt foundation for a blend.  An elegant and breezy "anytime" dram.

      		
 
			
 
A marriage of Ben Nevis (85%) and Clynelish (15%). A weighty whisky. Not as nimble as the Speyside expression below, but with flavors that linger. Rummy toffee notes, roasted nuts, earthy moss, jammy fruit, teasingly subtle black strap molasses, and clove. 

      		
 
			
 
Cragganmore is a whisky that typically needs time before it starts to get going and which then goes through many changes on its journey to its complex, layered apogee. Here it is at a slightly contradictory midpoint. The nose is fragrant and fruity: apricots, stewed apple, and yes, lemon; and, with water, a hint of smoke. The palate meanwhile shows more of the earthy depth and sloe berry richness that will slowly emerge. A pleasing dram, nonetheless. £75
      		
 
			
 
Light gold with a very fresh and slightly ozonic nose that brings to mind Thai herbs: lemongrass, galangal, as well as lime. Just slightly nippy when neat. The palate is equally intense, but with a central sweetness. Water cuts down this razor-sharp intensity, adding a softer mid-palate texture, while the finish remains slightly mineraly. A decent 
 Bunna. £97
-> On page 197 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Yes, it’s another 1991 Bunna from Wemyss, so check the name when purchasing. This one has a distinctly smoky element alongside the marine note which they both share. Very light lemon, with water, then a hit that’s like walking into a high-class sushi joint. A zesty start with lots of angelica, and then sweetness with, when diluted, soft malt and light ginger on the palate. Rock solid. £103
      		
 
			
 
Unusually, Wemyss Malts simultaneously offered two single cask bottlings of Clynelish in October 2014, both distilled in 1997 and matured in hogsheads. ‘Bench with a Sea View’ provided an out-turn of 371 bottles. The nose is sweet and fruity, with green apples and chocolate mousse. Slightly oily on the palate, with black pepper, salt, and orchard fruits. Persistently peppery in the finish, with citrus fruit, oak, a hint of brine, and cocoa. £68
      		
 
			
 
I’m playfully perplexed as to whether the titular “vintage” refers to an elderly strawberry or an aged punnet. Undaunted, this example from the Highland powerhouse noses much better than promised with fresh mint, small, tight strawberry buds, sandy loam, and a saccharine sweetness. It has a sweet, syrupy, fat flavor, in turn revealing caramel, buttery notes, white chocolate, vanilla, and black currant. A satisfying finish of browning butter and warm chestnuts. (242 bottles) £82
      		
 
			
 
This year’s bottling mixes 4 and 5 year old bourbon casks with the younger element finished in oloroso, though this is hardly sherried. Here is smoke, samphire, and Kilchoman’s fleshy core giving echoes of 80s cuisine: scallops and white peaches anyone? Watering shows sea-washed rock, light flowers, and hot sand. The palate is sweet, sour, and smoky, with a chalky edge and a peppery palate, but water releases blossom and a little gunsmoke: a duel in the dunes? £39
      		
 
			
 
A distillate of Islay-grown barley, made in 2009-10 and aged in bourbon wood. Here’s an intense Kilchoman with a licorice root sweetness mixed with dried seaweed, 
 (beach pasture), cereal, and herbal smoke. The palate is slightly oily and hot when neat, with a distinct mineral edge. Water shows its youth but also allows tarragon and wormwood to develop. £64
      		
 
			
 
Big and smoky, but with a rich, balancing, malty underbelly. Tarry rope, leafy bonfire, rooty peat, burnt licorice, smoked seaweed, coal ash, and vanilla-tinged malt, all with emerging brine, subtle Spanish olive, and a hint of ginger. A robust, yet well-rounded, Islay-style whisky with a pleasing oily texture, though I do wish it had a higher strength for a little more attitude.
      		
 
			
 
Matured in a “rejuvenated American oak” cask. “ Tropical fruit” is the operative descriptor here. Bananas in cream, honey-kissed citrus (lime, clementine), papaya, mango, a hint of coconut, green tea, and gentle vanilla. Soft finish. Rather exotic. Almost tries too hard to be cool. Distinctive, but I could tire of it sooner than the others here. (246 bottles) £200
      		
 
			
 
From the Balmenach distillery. (The previous bottling of this whisky was from a sherry cask. This one is from a bourbon cask.) Mouth-coating in texture. Ripe barley and malty up front, ultimately transitioning to a clinging dryness towards the finish. Notes of vanilla cream, toasted coconut, marshmallow, cut grass, honeydew melon, and lemon/lime. A pleasant, textural whisky. (Bottling at 46% and not chill-filtered enhances this.) My question: why sherry cask or bourbon cask? I think a marriage of both types of cask would add more dimension and complexity.
      		
 
			
 
Clean, simple, and straightforward: malty and smooth, with cut grass, hay, a kiss of honey, and a hint of gin botanicals. A nice whisky to introduce blend drinkers to the world of single malts.
      		
 
			
 
Without doubt this distillery is developing a core style, with peat the main variant over a grape, gooseberry, and lemon theme. This particular bottling is only available at the distillery, and to some degree treads water after a series of great releases. The smoke is quite light but assertive, and there's a pleasant spiciness on the palate to shake things up a little, but it doesn't punch as effectively as Chapter 11 or the rum cask offering. £45
-> On page 198 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
We’ve recorded the changing role of portwood use in whisky, with Tasmania and the likes of Amrut and Penderyn putting it center stage. St. George's hasn't…yet. But port clearly has momentum, because this has sold faster than the other two Founder's Private Cellar releases. Yet it doesn't quite work; the port is held in check so that the berry fruit compote, the earthiness of the malt, and a spearmint note clash with each other. £148
      		
 
			
 
The Famous Grouse has been extended in various directions with varying degrees of success but for my money, this is the best and most logical. This is the version where the smoky, oily, spicy, and peaty notes of the original blend are brought more to the fore, but this works because married to it are grape and melon notes that ensure the Grouse lands softly.
      		
 
			
 
More wood influence than the standard Jim Beam White Label. It’s a bit more robust, bolder, and with more wood spices (especially cinnamon and vanilla) and a curious botanical note. Throw in some corn, caramel, and honey, and this is what you get. Behind all that, I’m detecting a bit of youthfulness — I might like this bourbon with more age and less “devil.”
      		
 
			
 
Gently sweet vanilla, corn, and honey on the nose, with background spice and dried citrus. The same sweet notes show on the first half of the palate, with resinous oak, polished leather, and dried spice on the back end; the quarter cask aging is evident. Unfortunately, the sweet flavors and dried oak influence don’t marry very well, with too much sweetness and youthfulness up front, and too much oak bringing up the rear.
      		
 
			
 
Belgian whisky maker Etienne Bouillon has a strange production process, including maturation in modern, warm, and strip-lighted warehouses on an industrial estate, but he’s no slouch when it comes to whisky making, and he counts Bruichladdich’s Jim McEwan among his friends. This is melon and vanilla ice cream on the nose; banana, burnt rind, and a sprinkling of pepper on the palate. Youth reveals itself late, but this is dessert whisky at its best. €47 Currently not available in the U.S.  
      		
 
			
 
Expecting Scotch single malt? Go to the door and kick that thought right down the garden. Open your mind. Consider Australia as you do bourbon or Irish whiskey. It’s whisky, but not as the Scots know it — a new branch to the whisky tree. This is different, but special. Fresh, clean, young green apple, and pear, and not much else. But there’s a distinctive herbal rootsiness here that’s all Australian. There’s a clean sweet purity to the malt, too. Impressive. AUD150 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Nice color for a 10 year old. Puffing peat off the glass, with briny notes and sweetness: promising. The promise is kept in the mouth, too. It’s all there: peat smoke, brine, good round malt, some fruity notes in the finish, and a nice creamy texture. There’s a bit of astringency, and it’s hot for the proof. Still, a very convincing American iteration of a peated single malt, especially at this age.
      		
 
			
 
Diageo’s Singleton range is its answer to the problem of how to build a global single malt brand when each distillery will ultimately be limited by its capacity. Answer? A single brand: ‘Singleton,’ but from three distilleries, each focused on a different area of the world. Singleton of Dufftown is Europe’s expression, and this 15 year old combines cake mix, peanut butter, and fleshy fruits. There’s dried banana and vanilla on the palate, and a nutty sweet finish. £38 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
The U.S. Singleton comes from Glendullan, a distillery that makes a sweet, light spirit. Here, a percentage has been aged in ex-sherry casks, which has added a layer of fruity sweetness — think port-like sloe notes, Muscatel, and wisteria. The wood is lightly handled, allowing the aromas full rein on the palate.
      		
 
			
 
A tasty example from the historic North British distillery in Edinburgh, with a bouquet of vanilla, sweet hay, and mint ice cream. A sip made me nostalgic for childhood candies such as sherbet-filled, fizzy flying saucers and prohibited ivory-white candy sticks. I was seized by the initial lemon zing of acidic tartness, which becomes creamier before a richer, candied peel taste appears. There’s a clean, sweet finish and the mint pops up with water. Overall, satisfying but uncomplicated.
-> On page 199 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Hard to say what this is: the label just says “WHISKEY.” My nose, though, says “Irish whiskey.” Grassy malt, sweet heat, light pear esters. It's there in the mouth, too: smooth sweet malt, vaporous lift off the tongue, Irish light elegance, and a lingering finish with a slippery hint of vanilla. Considering the eponymous distiller is Irish... Nice stuff; now tell us more about it. 
      		
 
			
 
Barrel 2 was aged in 15-gallon bourbon refills, then finished in a Cedar Ridge rum barrel; interesting to see an American distiller walk away from “straight whiskey” with used (small!) cooperage. Aromas of sawdust, toffee, melon and just-ripe apricot, dry cocoa, and warm cereal fight a bit with alcohol heat. Rum and fruit float over malt and vanilla in the mouth, and the wood rounds and dries. Oak and faint allspice in the finish. Needs some more taming; great start.
      		
 
			
 
The price tag — higher than the entry level single malt — gives an indication as to what to expect from this blend, and it's a cracker. Made with 50 percent grain and 50 percent malt, the taste here is punctuated by a distinctive and unusual salt and pepper delivery. Beyond that there's creamy vanilla, soft peach, and a creamy rounded finish. It really dares to be different. €32 
      		
 
			
 
Verging on the opaque, with a powerful resinous hit bringing to mind a luthier’s workshop with added Morello cherry, Turkish delight, and bitter chocolate, but on the tongue it is surprisingly sweet rather than tannic, with a supple feel, albeit with dried fruits dominating. This is a great example of what a small amount of heavy sherry can give to a vatting, but is it Hakushu? Sherry bomb lovers will adore it. £100
      		
 
			
 
Smells like sweet, dead-ripe cherries, mashed up in bourbon with some brown sugar and just a dust of cinnamon. It's sweet, a bit thick, but 80 proof warming, and the bourbon — the Beam cinnamon note comes out clearer now — is dominant over the cherries here. The finish sees more cinnamon, even a hint of barrel oak, and manages to dry out a bit.
      		
 
			
 
What a difference a cask makes, say Southern Distillers, and they're not kidding. Just five casks have been made available so far, each one hand-crafted in traditional fashion by people who know what they're doing, and each one pushing out the envelope. This is the nuttiest and dustiest of the five and it wears its youth on its sleeve, but there are no feints and the whisky marks a step up in quality, with date, walnut, and golden syrup in the mix. A$110
      		
 
			
 
This is one of the more intriguing of the Double Barrel series, because while the others either complement each other or don’t,
this has a depth to it that you need to look for. At first it’s all Laphroaig, and the peat and sea burst out of the glass. But just as you’re asking yourself what the point is, the fruity notes of the Mortlach cushion the whole landing and let you down gently. Impressive. £48
      		
 
			
 
After Crown Royal is bottled the barrels are refilled with new whisky spirit, to spend three more years in silent slumber. “Crown washes out the woodiness and leaves the velvet behind,” one distillery worker enthuses. “We probably drink more of this in Gimli than the rest of the country combined.” The steely dusty rye, charcoal tinges, blistering white pepper, creamy butterscotch pudding, and candied ginger of Canadian 83 are the restrained, confident declaration of hard-bit whisky makers. C$24
      		
 
			
 
Smells sweet and minty, with gobs of oak and corn…and that’s about how it tastes, too. The corn sweetness and the mint are dominant, but warming oak spice wraps it loosely. It’s called “Young Bourbon” (labeled as “age under 4 years”), and that’s just what it tastes like, as some green youthful notes muscle their way in toward the finish. A bit of a rough-rider, but tasty. 
      		
 
			
 
Eighteen years? Really? In what? If you're a fan of big oak, don't stop here. All the wood seems to have added is a muddy, earthy note to what is a good whisky struggling to keep its head above water. There's tart lemon meringue in the mix, and creamy crushed hazelnut, an array of spices, and some bread dough. But the earthiness is a distraction. Overall, a bit of a confused kiwi. NZ$126
-> On page 200 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
A 2:1 blend of rye and “hand-malted barley” lightly smoked with fruitwood, aged with apple and oak wood chips in used bourbon barrels, finished in another used bourbon barrel, aged 12 months total. Was it worth it? A good rye smell, with fruit notes; quite appealing. Relatively smooth, and the smoke comes through quickly, with sweet pepper spice and vanilla. Not overly complex, but well-made and pleasant.
      		
 
			
 
Brace yourself, it's about to get bumpy. Liechtenstein is a tiny principality in central Europe and the Telser distillery sited there takes its whisky very seriously. Every stage, from drying the barley over smoke first to the red wine casks used for maturation, is designed to make this different from scotch. You'll love it or hate it. The linseed oil nose isn't encouraging, but the liqueur-like flavors, with fir tree, furniture polish, and Rumtopf-style fruit compote have their own charm.
      		
 
			
 
A sweet nose of barley sugar, Refreshers candy, ground cumin, mown grass, and a trace of salt emerge from this triple distilled malt matured in pinot noir and Swiss oak casks. It’s another robust dram from the Principality, though after a burst of maltiness, it remains a linear experience of spun sugar, toffee apples, crème brûlée, and pomegranate. Water slackens the mouthfeel to reveal soft lemons, but this latest release works really well neat. €69
      		
 
			
 
Molten blossom honey, almond milk puddings, and Parma violets interlaced with a fine, drifting chimney smoke compose the nose of this new blend from William Grant & Sons
 Smooth, burnished orange and honey cough drops initially, then the flavor develops through more pronounced citrus and gentle spices to achieve a sweeter climax. The grain is quite evident in the harmony of the blend. The finish is long, more beeswax than honey, the sweetness finally depleted. 
£20
      		
 
			
 
Organic rye, all grown on the Myer farm in the Finger Lakes by John Myer himself. 100% rye, converted with enzymes; the Myers do everything in-house. Nose is bent with rye oiliness and a faint peppermint brightness. In the mouth it’s rye bitterness all the way through, a crisp, fresh-chewed mint in a mouthful of sweet grassiness, and then a very quick finish: wham, bam, and gone. Simple and clean; could add depth and polish.
      		
 
			
 
If Tasmania is defining a distinctive whisky style, this is it. If you buy into the big red fruit and berry, full-frontal Aussie assault, accompanied by a rural earthiness, then this may be too ordered for you. But for most whisky drinkers exploring new territories the rounded red berry and orange fruits, and the full, rich, sweet center make it a perfect entry-level whisky to ease you in. A$130
      		
 
			
 
Proof there is life after Cooley. Jack Teeling and whiskey innovator Alex Chasko kept the independent flame alive by moving on. This whisky isn't a revolution: it's a mix of Irish (Cooley) and scotch (Bruichladdich). That's not a new idea, and it does what you might predict. It starts with a sweet, fruity Irishness, then earthier, spicier Scottish notes kick in. It works fine, but this is a placeholder whisky. Expect a lot more in the coming months.  
      		
 
			
 
Rose petals, pomegranate, toasted coriander seeds, and glacé cherry mix it up with a tangle of Bramley apple peelings. A medium weight grain whisky with a satiny texture. Huge, throbbing, pulsating ginger kicks in at full strength. Yowser! Water knocks the fiery ginger out, but quells this Loch Lomond to a duller spice profile. A finish of ground almond, subdued gingerbread, and active spices. Great nose, but I was hoping for greater versatility of flavor. £38
      		
 
			
 
This, with finishing time in sherry wood, is the most straightforward of the quartet, showing lovely touches of Seville orange rather than heavy dried fruits. With water there’s a slight meaty/new leather note that seems a more natural companion to Hanyu’s density, here with an extra earthy note from black cherries, juniper, and star anise. Water triggers tannins but there’s enough fruit here to balance. The most successful of the four, with the wood in balance. ¥8,500
      		
 
			
 
Finished off in a 500-liter American oak puncheon, this has typical Hanyu robustness with a burnt edge hinting at roasted corn. A little touch of fresh varnish and wax polish adds a savory air before fruits come through: strawberry, sloe, and plum. The palate is, to this mouth, very, very hot. Water reveals more dense fruit, and on the palate there’s plenty of toasted oak, stewed rhubarb, and dry-roasted peanuts on the finish. A very solid example.¥12,000
-> On page 201 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Distilled from a mash of malted two-row Canadian barley, and matured indoors for exactly 1,221 days in a first-fill bourbon barrel, Cask 8 is glowingly warm with soaring notes of acetone and sweet esters on a base redolent of linseed oil, gunnysacks, and grassy cereals. The palate is sweetish, like gummy bears, and very spicy. Pepper, ginger, and hot cinnamon bathe in a weighty, creamy body. A longish finish shows soft, oaky barrel notes. (
C$70
      		
 
			
 
They call it cowboy whisky: Smallish bottlers, mostly in the western U.S., buy custom-blended bulk whisky from Canada to release under their own label. This one has enough cachet to find its way back north and into the Canadian market. Sweet and smooth with rich buttery caramels, searing pepper, sizzling ginger, and slatey, dusty rye. Rich dark fruits on the palate turn to zesty citrus notes, then cleansing pith as one sip slowly dissolves into the next. C$25
      		
 
			
 
A 100% rye whiskey, made from rye grown about 30 miles from Mississippi River Distilling. Strongly spicy and oily rye character reaching out of the glass and grabbing my nose; some surprising pastry and molasses notes hiding in there. The 40% mildness is disappointing at first, but develops into a spicy, minty mouth-filler with a cleanly sweet finish. On the sweet side, would prefer it drier.
      		
 
			
 
Sweet corn and oak, with some green apple and grass notes; a light, pleasant nose that goes hot closer to the surface. Quite light and young in the mouth, clean, with understated oak notes; not taxing or tiring, and a long finish of teaberry and mint. Nothing amazing or overly complex, but a clean, pleasant sip of whiskey. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Distiller Colin Schmidt is earning his blending chops honestly, using sourced whiskies to keep the cash flow positive while his own distillate matures. Sweet burned wood underpins rich dried fruit, hints of crisp oak, butterscotch pudding, and sour gooseberries. Hot pepper and cinnamon enliven a syrupy mouthfeel as the palate broadens into warm, clean earth and dry, weathered barn board. A long, lingering burn finishes in tingling ginger ale and candied citrus peel. 
 C$50
      		
 
			
 
Nose of sweet cinnamon candy, wintergreen, and wet wood. Wintergreen and hot/sweet cinnamon carry through on the palate, with light vanilla and some pleasant oak around the edges. Happy shiny whiskey, but you realize what’s missing when you get to the finish…and there isn’t one. Incredibly quick on the finish, and pretty simple throughout. It’s like summer love: fun, but shallow and over quickly. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Denmark often seems to live in the shadow of Sweden, and certainly that has been the case with whisky. But slowly and surely a revolution is happening there, and I suspect that Stauning will be right at the forefront of it. This is another work in progress: pleasant, well made, and potentially very good indeed. The dominant flavors are gooseberry, sour apple, and pepper. Good as an aperitif. 695 Krone/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
Adnams brewery is known for two things in particular: a fearless approach to bold flavors and its investment in quality. Its other spirits are award winners, but it's going to have to wait a little longer to repeat the trick with its single malt. This is just 3 years old and while it’s extremely well made and the maturation in virgin French oak ensures tastiness, spice, and sweet soft vanilla, it hasn't fully realized its potential. £44
      		
 
			
 
The first thing to note is the strength. It’s surprisingly not that hot initially, rather there are hints of soft orchard fruits, gentle smoke, and seashells. With water, the fruits show up—mango and peach—but the alcohol is still masking things. Water goes in immediately to produce a palate that is cool, slightly sweet, with seashore notes, wet stones, and those fruits, but there’s still a real tension to the whole experience. For the brave. £110
      		
 
			
 
This 17 year old refill hogshead-matured expression of Dalmore was distilled in May 1997, and 237 bottles have been released. It is an interesting example of Dalmore uncut, without the proprietary sherry maturation-spin usually put on it. The nose is sweet, with caramel, tinned peaches and pineapple, and a smearing of honey. Zesty spices open the palate, which becomes nutty, with Jaffa oranges, gingery oak, and dark chocolate. Long and warming in the finish, with more oak and plain chocolate. £78
-> On page 202 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
From an undisclosed Speyside distillery. The nose is extraordinarily yeasty, with distinct apple cider backed by light caramel. The palate is more integrated than the nose with oak and cinnamon spice, apple, honey, and malt. At first these flavors are well balanced, but a spice and heat blast in the mid-palate throws things off. The finish reflects this and is quite dry. The parts are better than the whole in an interesting and strong whisky.  (
)
      		
 
			
 
Bottled at 8 years of age as part of Exclusive Malts’ U.S. Batch 5, this is a relatively youthful expression of the peated Ledaig spirit produced at Tobermory distillery. The nose is full-on and vibrant, with seaweed, brine, peat, black pepper, and new leather. The palate opens with a big punch of spicy peat, then sweet cereal notes and more black pepper. Hot smoke and spice in the medium-length finish, with a hint of coal.
      		
 
			
 
Matured in refill, remade American hogsheads, this 1998 bottling from Tobermory on the Isle of Mull is of the peated Ledaig variant. The nose offers dry peat, brown wrapping paper, fish oil, and wood preservative. Oily on the palate, with bitter orange, sweet peat, ginger, and black pepper, plus fabric band-aids. Lingering pepper and Germolene in the ashy finish. £45
      		
 
			
 
This batch of 1,420 bottles was created with slightly older malts, a 16 year old grain from a refill hogshead and a 14 year old Lowland malt disgorged from an Islay cask. Sugar mice, dried hay, sharpened pencils, hints of lemon, with subtle smoke like the burning of a distant stubble field. Sweet cereal notes, black pepper, and ginger parkin build to a conclusion of Brazil nut, mocha, and chocolate ganache. 
      		
 
			
 
New distillery in Lancaster, Penn. “Locally sourced” grain, copper pot still, unaged. Rich new-make smell, warm, full grain, rye oil, and anise. Light spirit: sweet, more grain and a character like pizzelles; sweet crisp anise cookies. Easily enjoyed, with a finish of more sweet grain and anise. Interestingly schnapps-like, given the area’s German roots.
      		
 
			
 
Located in the heart of Vermont’s syrup belt, Saxtons River distillery makes both a Vermont maple-flavored rye and a maple-flavored bourbon whiskey. The rye is the better of the two and does a solid job of mixing oak, cinnamon, black pepper, and rye spice notes with vanilla and rich maple syrup. The rye whiskey is a little young, but the maple syrup complements it well and is more companion than cover.
      		
 
			
 
An 18 year old single malt for just $33 should set alarm bells ringing. But this sherry-finished Kirkland expression from an undisclosed distillery is definitely a decent dram at a bargain-basement price. Initially slightly vegetal and earthy on the nose, developing a warm leatheriness, with sherry, figs, melon skin, and caramel. Silky on the palate, with milk chocolate, emerging hazelnuts, sweet sherry, and honey. The finish is medium in length, with spicy orange and mocha coffee notes.
      		
 
			
 
The eldest son of the 5
 earl of Wemyss, Lord Elcho was supportive to the Young Pretender. Proportionally, more sherry at play here. Plum skin, chunky raisins, blackcurrant, and fainter sweetened cocoa and coffee bean notes. The palate is a little hollow at first, then proffers barley sugar, rich shortbread, baked apple, linseed, and toffee, though the flavor development plateaus. Water picks out sweet clementine notes. Given the choice of expressions, I prefer the vibrancy of the Young(er) Pretender. £26
      		
 
			
 
Sharp nose, a bit of heat, fresh ground/cracked spices—cinnamon, pepper, allspice—and hot sugar about to caramelize. There’s nothing soft here. The first crash on the tongue isn’t soft either; it’s rushing bonded heat, insistent pepper, and dry oak. Wait a bit, and it calms as you finally find the corn and the mouth widens, then slides into a dryer, lasting finish. Pretty wild ride for a wheated bourbon.
      		
 
			
 
From a bourbon-style mashbill matured in new Missouri oak, this first whisky from 66 Gilead salutes Wild Oak farm, where contented cattle dine on the distillery’s spent grains. Dry grain, gray weathered wood, sea breezes, caramel, and soft, earthy, woody notes become vanilla, saltwater taffy, cherries, and fruit punch, with herbal hints of celery. It’s hot and spicy with sizzling pepper and searing ginger over a barrelhouse woodiness. Young, but not rough, with a long, peppery finish.
-> On page 203 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Strong, bold aromas of rye grain, fruit (raspberries, black grapes), and dry cinnamon. Punchy rye on the tongue, starts 42% tame but quickly catches fire, roaring toward a barnburner of a finish. As the fire dies down, you find cocoa and rye oil in the embers. This young (12 month) rye is small-barrel shouty, but the roots are good. Solid effort.
      		
 
			
 
First impression is of molten Reese’s peanut butter cups. This 13 year old single grain whiskey has been finished in second-fill red wine casks from Ànima Negra in Mallorca, however this wine cask has given the whiskey a kick in the Balearics. The grain character takes a drubbing, the nose engulfed by jam pots and loganberry. It is gentle and deliciously fruity, reminiscent of strawberry, raspberry pop tarts, and citrus groves. Black pepper and caramelized sugar to close. (417 bottles) €90
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in February 2005. Earthy peat, brine, vanilla, cereal, and a hint of cinnamon on the confident nose. Finally, wood smoke. Lively in the mouth, with nutty spices and pipe tobacco, while peat briefly takes a back seat before reasserting itself. Ginger and peat embers in the medium-length finish. 
£35/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
The nose features strong rye spice accompanied by sharp, young oak along with black pepper, graphite, and a touch of green apple. The entry is much heavier and sweeter than you’d expect from such a young whiskey. Things quickly change in the mid-palate with a spice blast of cinnamon, black pepper, rye, and oak. A solid dash of heat gives the mid-palate some kick and drives a short, dry finish. Some nice ideas hampered by the reality of youth.
      		
 
			
 
A non-age stated single malt from Washington State. Light amber in color, there’s more oak on the nose than you’d expect, along with baked apple, chocolate, cinnamon, and clove. Chocolate leads the entry, followed by clove, cinnamon, baked apple, and salt. A spicy mid-palate picks up some ginger and a dash of heat. The finish is fairly short and dry. This feels a bit young and lacks depth. An interesting start; let's see where it goes from here.
      		
 
			
 
Heavy caramel, hints of pansies, dustiness, warming spices, gentle pepper, and bushels of fruit. The 
 sherry finish gives a tannic red wine feel without much wineyness. About that finish: rather than “rejuvenating” barrels by pouring in sherry and swishing it around before adding the whisky, sherry was blended directly with mature 8 year old Canadian rye, which then spent two months in American oak barrels. Whisky purists may recoil, but the result is very tasty dram. 
      		
 
			
 
Here, talented distiller David Fitt shows us his latest expression of heavily peated whisky. The nose has jalapeño and bell peppers, with pungent peat smoke that catches at the back of the throat. The smoke is sooty coal dust buoyed with some sweetness, but without a medicinal edge to the phenols. Sipping brought lemon bonbons, herbal elements, and some burnt toast character. It swells out in the middle before relenting, leaving a quenching, sweet finish and a smoky aura. £45
      		
 
			
 
A cask from some of the last remaining stocks of whisky from New Zealand’s Wilson distillery. A very unpretentious creamy-sweet malt (fresh vanilla, honey), with subtle floral notes, mint and hints of smoke. A bit youthful in character-especially on the finish. I think two to five more years on oak would enhance this whisky and provide additional depth and smoothness, but it is quite enjoyable right now, at ten years old. 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Single malt scotch (distillery not identified) Color: Golden amber Aroma: Dry, smoky, firm, clean. Palate: Peat smoke with a teasing sweetness (especially up front), becoming firm, dry, and subtly spicy on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Bright gold. Very citric, sweet candied orange and tangerine marmalade, with a hint of pink grapefruit. As I said, citric. There’s meadow hay and some sherbet as well. Water brings out lucerne grass. The palate is equally delicate and ‘up,’ and quite acidic (no bad thing) with light, nutty chocolate and macadamia nut. When diluted, there’s poached pear and charred oak. The finish is effervescent. Light, easy-going, keenly priced. The rehabilitation of Cardhu continues. £41
-> On page 204 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Interestingly crisper than and not as rich as the 17 year old, with warming oak spice to accompany the light toffee, cocoa powder, “corn in a burlap sack,” sultana, and dusty mint. Peppery, spicy oak finish that lingers. The fieriest of the three. 

      		
 
			
 
Comprised of bourbon aged 6 to 8 years old (and seems closer to 6 than 8). This new, fairly bold for 81 proof whiskey, while drinkable neat or with a splash of water, really works best as a mixer. Very traditional bourbon notes of caramel, vanilla, mint, cinnamon, sweet corn, and orchard fruit. 
      		
 
			
 
Finished in toasted maple wood. I love the nose on this: complex notes of rum, golden raisin, maple syrup, nougat, polished leather, and warming cinnamon. The love continues on the palate, but toward the finish the flavors turn a bit aggressive (leather, tannins), which somewhat tarnishes an otherwise exciting, well-orchestrated whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Two malts: same distillation run, same proof, but this one was aged in used bourbon barrels. The color is much lighter than the new barrel bottling (also reviewed this issue), a pale straw. Nose is delicate, notes of haymow planks, clover honey, fresh grain, and sweet orange peel. Somewhat pedestrian on the palate: sweet malt, dried hay, more citrus, and a touch of pepper, with a somewhat bitter finish. No real flaws, but no excitement either. Disappointing.
      		
 
			
 
Silky and sweet up front, with English toffee and lush, bright, honeyed fruit.  But similar to the “Rye 90” release, leather and oak resin dominate the back end of the palate through the finish. More balance is needed to warrant a higher rating. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Each of these three bourbons was distilled and bottled at the same time, and aged in the same warehouse for 12 years and 3 months. The main variable was the floor they were aged on. In theory, the higher up in the warehouse, the greater the temperature variation, and the more wood influence. Does the experiment support this general concept? Yes, with the sweet spot being the middle floor.

A much deeper, bolder, spicier, drier, and (at times) harsher bourbon when compared to the other two in this experiment, aged on the first and fifth floor. The wood influence (notes of barrel char, leather, and tannin) from the barrel dominate the pleasing sweet and fruit notes found in the other two. This is for those who like their bourbon with plenty of oak influence. Best served after a large, rich meal. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Chewy toffee and nougat, with some dusty corn notes along with minty rye and cinnamon. The whiskey’s fruit is subtle and subdued, finishing boldly dry with oaky vanilla and leather. Not as bright and intensely spicy as the Sazerac Rye 18 year old on the market, and it’s the antithesis of the younger Sazerac Rye 6 year old also reviewed in this Buyer’s Guide. An enjoyable, mature rye whiskey. 

      		
 
			
 
The label says 10 years old, but this tastes more like bourbon in its mid teens. A big bourbon, and quite the antithesis of the 80 Strong below. Sweet notes of maple syrup and toffee are quickly taken over by firm mint and dried fruits, which then yields to emerging notes of polished leather, roasted nuts, and dry resinous oak. Long, spicy dried finish with cinnamon, mint, and oak. For those who like their bourbon bold and with plenty of oak impact. (Bottled exclusively for Bayway World of Liquor.) 

      		
 
			
 
Fresh and floral, with lively tropical fruit, honey, and vanilla. Gentle on the palate, with a slight syrupy texture to its malty foundation. Youthful, orange marmalade finish with a hint of spice. A pleasant, easy-going whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Lemon-lime gum drops and fresh-cut grass notes, with an underlying creamy, marshmallow-tinged maltiness. Plenty of vanilla, along with a hint of ginger spice zing. Clean, nicely rounded, and fully mature for its age. 

-> On page 205 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Whisky from two different sherry casks. The sherry, extra aging, and higher strength produce an intensely rich Auchentoshan. Fudgy caramel, toffee and cocoa notes are offset by golden raisin, apricot, and Clementine. Underlying notes of roasted nuts, old leather, and spice (vanilla, mint) peek through occasionally. An enjoyable whisky, but much of the Auchentoshan is lost somewhere in all that oak and sherry. 

      		
 
			
 
Initially mulch and damp undergrowth on the nose, with a whiff of sulfur. Then developing soft toffee and vanilla notes, though the ‘outdoors’ odor remains. Big and oily in the mouth, with a chewy texture. Oak, citrus fruit, hazelnuts, and spices, plus a hint of gunpowder tea. Medium to long in the finish, with more oak, ginger, and quite bitter coffee. A typically ‘off the rails’ independent Ben Nevis. Great if you have a soft spot for a ‘bad boy!’ 
      		
 
			
 
Another Benrinnes from the UK bottler’s new range, here the finish is more forceful, with masses of raisined sweetness, blueberry syrup, and molasses. The Benrinnes character adds weight and a firm earthy base, but this is more cask driven, slightly grippy, and for all the richness of the PX cask, the end result is a little bitter because of the treacle/molasses note. Fun certainly, but a bit over the top. £60/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
Invigorating and youthful, with a raw edge to it. Challenging notes of creosote, charred oak, and earthy peat fire dominate, with underlying ripe barley, honey, and caramel apple. Aggressive, but not over the top.

      		
 
			
 
This cask-strength whisky turns cloudy with the addition of water. Nice balance of both moderate sherry and smoke, with underlying fruit gum drops, shortbread, charcoal, black licorice, and subtle herbs. An assertive whiskey. The flavors aren’t as crisp as I would like, but pretty good for seven years old. (Bottled exclusively for Binny’s Beverage Depot)

      		
 
			
 
Maturation for this 21 year old bottling of Bladnoch occurred in a refill American oak hogshead. Sweet orchard fruits, new-mown hay, malt, and soft toffee on the nose. The palate is initially fruity, with more malt, then nuttiness develops, with aniseed and black pepper. The finish is relatively short and tannic. 
      		
 
			
 
Light and very creamy, with very subtle smoke in the background, this is like eating a white chocolate ice cream while walking toward a distant beach barbecue. The palate is gentle and sweet with good, refreshing saline balance. Water brings out mint. It’s just a little too tight and disconnected on the tongue.
      		
 
			
 
Aged half in used bourbon barrels, half in refill sherry casks. Thicker, more viscous, and with much more depth than the other three Bruichladdichs reviewed here. The whisky oozes syrupy vanilla, marshmallow, caramel, and marzipan, accentuated by coconut and other tropical fruits. Bruichladdich's signature freshness and brine emerges, but oh, so subtly. It finishes firmly dry and oaky, thanks to all those years in wood. Initially this helps to cut some of the sweetish viscosity of this whisky, but it lingers a bit too long for my palate. I would like to have tried this whisky a few (or perhaps even several) years back.
      		
 
			
 
The most heavily peated of the three (35ppm phenol), but rather gentle for such smoke intensity. No doubt this is partly due to its sweet underbelly of vanilla cream puff, honeyed barley, and melon fruit. The other factor is that the smoke influence is not medicinal like some other Islay whiskies, but rather more of a leafy bonfire smoke, with burning embers and teasing brine on the finish. Like Waves, Peat comes across as a bit youthful.

      		
 
			
 
This is the new super-peated (131 ppm phenol barley) Bruichladdich. “Super-peated” seems almost like an understatement. Ultra-peated, perhaps? Intense smoke on the nose and palate, with notes of freshly tarred road, cigar smoke and ash, licorice root, bacon fat, kalamata olive, and smoked seaweed. Struggling to emerge are youthful orchard fruit, honeyed malt, brine, and soft vanilla. Long, smoky finish -- like licking the walls of a peat-infused kiln. A very invigorating whisky. It’s a few years younger than the other ultra-peated whisky, Ardbeg Supernova. I think if they were both the same age, I would like them equally (and score them equally -- I gave Supernova an 89). But the Octomore does taste a little green, which was not noticeable in the Supernova. I think Octomore will be very good in another five years, and amazing in another ten. Let’s hope the lads at Bruichladdich are holding some stocks back.
-> On page 206 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Notes of smoked olives and an earthy peatiness wrapped inside layers of sweetness (honey, caramel and light toffee). The whisky is laced with seaweed and pepper for added zest, with a long smoky and peppery finish. It shows enough maturity, yet it is young enough to let the true Caol Ila character shine through. I would like to have seen this whisky bottled at a higher strength and not chill-filtered. 

      		
 
			
 
Beautiful complex fruit on the nose. Tannic grip on the palate -- especially on the finish. The tell-tale orange marmalade combines notes of orchard fruit, caramel apple, fried pineapple, banana nut bread, unsweetened chocolate, grape skin, and plain toast, peppered with cinnamon and ground espresso bean. Distinctive and evolving on the palate -- and humming along quite nicely -- until the oak turns a bit austere and aggressive on the finish. For this reason, it’s my least favorite of the range.
      		
 
			
 
This 1995 vintage is exclusively available from Whisky Shop in the UK. The whisky was selected by distillery manager Ian Mackay and his team, and matured in Matusalem sherry and American white oak casks. 1,800 bottles are available. Worn leather, candied orange, malt, and cinnamon on the nose. Spicy orange, sherry, mixed nuts, and licorice on the palate. The finish is slowly drying, with dark chocolate and smoky caramel notes. £85
      		
 
			
 
Remarkably pale in color, this Exclusive Malt is a rare peated Dalmore. Peat reads more funky barnyard than smoke on the nose, with just a touch of sweetness behind it. The taste is much better than the smell, with the addition of smoke to the peat, intertwined with honey, salt, citrus, and ginger spice. The finish is slightly acidic and dry, far less satisfying than the mid-palate. There’s a reason why Dalmore doesn’t peat, but this release is still fascinating. 
      		
 
			
 
Initial maturation of Valour takes place in first-fill bourbon casks, before a period in 30 year old Matusalem 
 sherry butts from Gonzales Byass. Finally it is transferred to port pipes from the Duoro region of Portugal. The nose is floral, with sherry notes, ripe oranges, and marzipan, while the palate offers dark sherry, with bitter orange, contrasting chocolate-coated fudge, and gingersnaps. The finish is medium to long, with lively spices and berry bitterness. 
Price is per liter.
      		
 
			
 
Bottling at a higher proof without chill-filtering has improved the whisky, amplifying its subtle flavors. Antique gold color. The flavors are bright and fresh, with notes of citrus, pineapple, lemongrass, and subtle ginger, all on a bed of clean honeyed malt, light toffee and soft vanilla. Gentle, easy-going finish. A pleasant “any time of the day” dram.

      		
 
			
 
Finished in virgin oak casks, so I would expect to find some wood influence here somewhere. Indeed I do, particularly on the finish. There’s no age statement, but on the nose it comes across as a bit youthful. Honeyed vanilla, lemon, pear, fresh-cut grass, and wood shavings on the nose. More of the same on the palate, with sweet notes to the fore, and virgin oak influence (wood shavings, polished leather, and a firm oak grip). Very individualistic, but the flavors don’t seem fully integrated. (Perhaps a bit more aging in non-virgin casks?)
      		
 
			
 
A “straight from the cask” bottling, finished in a Grand Arôme rum barrel. I can really pick up the rum. If you’ve ever had rum from La Reunion island (easiest to find in France), you immediately pick it out here. Peculiar straw gold/lime green color. Intriguing on the palate, too: botanicals, fennel, liqueur-ish, honeyed malt, red licorice, and tropical fruit. Sort of like a cross between a scotch and something Benedictine monks would make. A nice change of pace. (Bottled for Maxwell Street Trading Co.)

      		
 
			
 
Here’s a whisky not seen very often in the U.S. When it is seen, it’s from one of the independent bottlers. I have always felt that younger Glen Grant whiskies make a nice introduction to the single malt category-especially for a blend drinker trading up. The whisky is usually light to medium in body and uncomplicated-with no harsh edges to be particularly offensive. And so it is with this whisky. A soft, cereal grain maltiness marries nicely with floral, delicately fruity notes throughout. Gentle, dry but malty finish, with suggestions of shortbread cookies and vanilla. A nice representation of a younger Glen Grant. The flavors are clean and tight. 

      		
 
			
 
Four years ago Glen Grant was in a sorry state, its beautiful gardens in need of some love and attention, its malts neglected and seemingly unloved. Then Campari bought it and we have heard very little more since. That’s until now. With a new visitor center, the gardens in full bloom, and the owners determined to make it a major player, things are looking up. This limited edition 170th anniversary bottling is made up of vintages stretching back to the 70s. They include a couple of sherry butts and some peated spirit. The result is a rich malt with some buttery toffee notes at first, distinctive lemon and green apple notes, and a touch of aniseed. Midway through, it sets off in a more feisty direction, with some peat, sharp spice, and green banana skin. Beguiling and unusual, it’s a statement of intent from an iconic distillery — watch this space. (Selected specialist outlets, excluding the U.S.) 
-> On page 207 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Initially fresh and briny -- the Campbeltown signature being quite evident -- leading to chewy toffee, nutty notes. The brine emerges again -- this time with a hint of seaweed and smoke, followed by another wave of chewy toffee and nuts. The flavors stubbornly refuse to integrate fully, coming across on the palate individually and independently. Sort of like consecutive solos, rather than harmony.
      		
 
			
 
This Glencadam variant has been finished for 20 months in ruby port pipes. The result is a whisky that departs from its younger stablemate by offering a nose of rose petals, milk chocolate, stewed rhubarb, sweet red wine, and black pepper. The same ‘new paper’ note survives, however. Viscous on the palate; initially strawberries, then spicy milk chocolate, caramel, and candied cherries. Remaining sweet in the finish, with nutmeg and darker chocolate notes. £35
      		
 
			
 
No doubt about it, we’re at the furthest outpost of GlenDronach’s territory here, and this particular cask has waved the white flag. It has a dense, sappy, and nutty nose which is very savory and not particularly attractive. But thankfully there’s more to welcome you on the palate, with some rich orange and red fruit and sweet candy providing balance to the savory notes, and gentle oak and hazelnuts also getting a look in. The finish is woody and pruney. £185 
      		
 
			
 
The first widely-available single malt from the revived distillery of Glenglassaugh, Revival comprises spirit from both first and refill casks, finished in first-fill oloroso sherry butts for a period of six months. Initially a little mashy, with beer-like aromas. Quite sweet and mildly sherried, with developing roasted malt notes, ginger, hazelnuts, and caramel. Leather and insistent spice on the palate, majoring in nutmeg and cinnamon. Straightforward in the finish; spicy and nutty. Probably a crackerjack in another dozen years!
      		
 
			
 
I’m a fan of the original Nadurra’s freshness, which maximizes Glenlivet’s apple blossom and pineapple perfume. This pleasantly funky new brother has been matured wholly in 
, which adds (very) sweet sherry, nougat, blackcurrant, grilled pear, and malt. While the palate starts well, with mixed red and black fruits (and a little grapefruit), the sherry adds thickness from back palate on and the distillery slides away. Pleasant, but a tale of two halves. (
      		
 
			
 
Firm on the palate and quite mature. Good balance with malty-toffee notes accented by dried oak spices. Additional notes of roasted nuts, tobacco, Earl Grey tea, sandalwood, and a hint of peat and bacon fat. (260 bottles produced.) 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Speyside single malt scotch Color: Bright gold Aroma: Fresh cut grass. Damp grist. Vanilla, marshmallow, and banana. Palate: Sweet malt initially, then quickly becoming dry, oaky, grassy, and spicy. Big, long, dry, spicy finish. 

      		
 
			
 
The newest whisky in the regular stable of wood-finished whiskies for Glenmorangie. Very fruity-sometimes reminiscent of overripe fruit; other times cooked fruit. In the mix, there’s maple syrup, plum, almonds, and sweet barley notes. The whisky is peppered with spicy notes of toasted oak, cinnamon and vanilla. A whisky that is lush on the nose, chewy on the palate, with a finish of dried spices for balance. This whisky takes some getting used to, and it’s not an every day whisky. You’ll have to be in the right mood for it. 

      		
 
			
 
Very much in the Glenrothes style, with a viscous texture that clings to the palate. Very perfumed and fragrant, too, with flavors of assorted dried fruit, vanilla, golden raisin, citrus, and honey that dry quickly on the palate. A suggestion of peat lingers in the background and on the whisky’s clinging finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Light gold. From a refill bourbon cask, here we have more marzipan and some light maltiness alongside very fresh fruit and delicate vanilla. This is Rothes in slightly lean and hungry mode, with its signature fruits and spices in the background. Needs water to smooth things out. When that happens, there’s lemon drizzle cake, leafiness, and walnut flour. A little short on the finish.  £90
-> On page 208 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Honey, vanilla, heather, and citrus are the major components of this Highland Park, with a hint of youthful peat in the background. Some polished oak kicks in on the palate towards the finish. A pleasant whisky for those who like a mature Highland Park without the sherry cask influence. (A Bayway World of Liquor exclusive.) 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in a bourbon cask. This is a big, vibrantly fruity whisky (lemon, lime, orange, grape), with background notes of anise, fat barley, and vanilla. An unusual and often difficult to find dram. (Bottled exclusively for “Wine on the 9”.) 

      		
 
			
 
An interesting comparison to the Mackillop’s Choice expression reviewed above. This is also a big, bold whisky from the currently mothballed Imperial distillery. This one is less fruity. Instead it is quite sweet with a ripe maltiness up front-and rather viscous in texture-becoming dry, slightly austere, and spicy on the finish, with a wisp of smoke. (Bottled exclusively for Binny’s Beverage Depot.) 

      		
 
			
 
You could argue that there’s an element of auto-suggestion at work when you pick up saltiness in Inchgower, after all, it comes from a fishing port (Buckie). But taste it blind and there it is — an unmistakable salinity on nose and palate which, when combined with lemon accents, cumin seed, thin fruit syrups, and green grapes, makes this an intense, perfect, aperitif. £37 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Gold color. Aroma of vanilla, honeyed malt, subtle marshmallow, with background herbal, hay-like notes. Light and creamy in body. Creamy, malty, vanilla notes in flavor-honey sweet initially, but eventually drying out towards the finish, with soft herbal, grassy, hay notes. 

      		
 
			
 
A new, no age statement addition to the Laphroaig family that blends together Quarter Cask, PX, Triple Wood, and 10 year old. The nose is reminiscent of freshly-treated decking, before some classic iodine creeps in. Water brings out geranium, pollen, and damp leather. The palate is simple, clean, and mild (and smoky), with bay leaf, light dried fruit, and that oily wood. Undoubtedly there's a lot going on, but it’s not married, and 40% means it lacks the necessary wallop. £35
      		
 
			
 
Lochside closed in 1992 and its whisky will become increasingly difficult to find. Very fragrant and quite fruity, with lemon, raspberry, red currant, and plum on the nose. It starts out clean and fruity on the palate too, with a gentle maltiness, but this is quickly taken over by dominant toffee and caramel. A nice Lochside whisky, which could have been even better with a little less toffee on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
When compared to Craiglodge, reviewed above, this whisky is more intensely smoky, tarry, and youthful on the palate. The other flavors, while in the same vein as Craiglodge, are more reserved (or perhaps more greatly overshadowed by the peat). If your intent is full-throttle peat, this is your whisky. If you want variety on the palate, go for the Craiglodge. 

      		
 
			
 
This peated expression of Springbank is fresh, powerful, and unbridled. A brief, gristy, sweet malt intro quickly becomes quite aggressive, with an attack of tar, damp peat, kippers, mustard seed, Spanish olives, and Poire Williams. The sweetness emerges again briefly, before succumbing to an assertive, fiery finish. 

      		
 
			
 
With Longmorn, you are always looking for a dense, sweet fruitiness. This doesn’t disappoint on the nose, where there’s moist compacted fruitcake with marzipan, Brazil nut, glacé cherry, a hint of tobacco, then hard toffee. The palate is soft to start but then an overly firm grip and slightly bitter edges come through. Though water improves it, the oak is slightly too dominant. That said, the nose is superb. £80 
-> On page 209 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Fragrant aromas of ripe barley and vanilla, with some background pear, hay, dusty cocoa, ginger, and lemon grass. Similar follow through on the palate, with a creamy mouthcoating texture throughout and a drying finish. Nice anytime. 

      		
 
			
 
A pleasing malt all around, if not overly complex or challenging. Clean, full malt foundation (the Lomond still is obvious), vanilla, and butterscotch with soft fruit and balancing dry oak spice that lingers on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Another catch-up from G&M, this time from the ‘Beast of Dufftown.’ Immediate substance and solidity, which is what you want from Mortlach, but there’s also thick-cut marmalade and cumin. Only with water, however, does the classic meatiness emerge—like a lamb tangine with apricot. A cleaner, slightly lighter side to the Flora & Fauna 16 year old, but with heft and a burnt licorice sweetness. A great introduction to a classic distillery.
      		
 
			
 
This 21 year old expression is lighter in color and not as sweet or fruity as the younger 17 year old also reviewed here. Very mouthcoating in texture, with notes of dry vanilla, fat barley, coconut, citrus fruit, and pineapple. Long, intensely appetizing, dry salty finish. As an aperitif, or perhaps with seafood. 

      		
 
			
 
The distillery closed in 1993. Very fragrant, with a potpourri of dried spice, herbs, and (to a lesser degree) flowers on the nose and palate. The spices are accentuated by mint tea, fennel, clove, and faint vegetal notes. Dry, spicy finish. Not an elegant Rosebank, but rather, this is Rosebank with an attitude. 

      		
 
			
 
A relative newcomer to the Scotch whisky industry, having just turned 12. And over the past decade, we’ve had plenty of opportunity to watch this whisky mature, as it was first bottled after a few years as Drumguish, and then under the Speyside name as an 8 year old and 10 year old before this 12 year old expression. This whisky continues to develop with age. The foundation of this particular bottling is a generous serving of toffee, nuts, and vanilla fudge. Fruity, golden raisin and peach notes provide contrast, with toffee and subtle oak on the finish. Whisky for dessert, anyone? 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Highland (Isle of Skye) single malt scotch Color: Antique amber Aroma: Toffee, cookies fresh from the oven, waxy ripe fruit, bonfire smoke and damp peat, with background notes of pepper, brine, smoked kippers, and a hint of seaweed. Palate: Similar to its aroma. Full-bodied and quite thick in texture. Dry, smoky, peppery finish. 

      		
 
			
 
This bottling celebrates distillery manager Douglas Campbell’s 50 years of service at Tomatin, and includes casks from 1967, 1976, 1984, and 1990, along with a peated Tomatin from 2005. The nose is initially slightly musty, with faint peat smoke, sweetening to mild vanilla, with new leather and peaches in time. Full-bodied, relatively dry on the palate, with the European oak casks in the ascendancy here. Raisins, dark chocolate, and licorice. Medium to long in the finish, drying, with spicy oak. 
      		
 
			
 
Soft and creamy in texture. A delicate mélange of fruit and a teasing nuttiness balance nicely with the whisky’s gently sweet notes of lightly toasted marshmallow and caramel, finishing soft and pleasingly dry. A very smooth whisky you could drink all day long. 

      		
 
			
 
Fresh and clean, with notes of creamy barley, cut grass, coconut marshmallow, pencil shavings, and oatcake. Soft finish. Subtle spice dances about in the background. Bottling at 46% adds to the richness. A soothing whisky. 

-> On page 210 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Tullibardine 225 Sauternes is finished in Sauternes dessert wine casks from Chateau Suduiraut in Bordeaux, and the nose majors in citrus fruits, vanilla, pepper, and a discreet herbal note. Citrus fruits carry through to the spicy palate, with Jaffa orange to the fore, plus malt. Spicy to the very end, with milk chocolate and a suggestion of passion fruit.
      		
 
			
 
A much-beloved malt in the U.S. Some say it’s because it is easy to pronounce (though having said that, remember it’s ‘OH-bin’ and not ‘O’Bahn’). I’d prefer to think its popularity is because there is something about the fresh cleanliness of the nose, its orange oils, chocolate, and zesty-zingy and yes, occasionally salty spiciness that is instantly appealing.
      		
 
			
 
Distilled in 2008, this is the youngest whiskey in the group. A vast departure from last year’s release — which was delicious — particularly on the palate. This year’s is thinner and less complex, with unintegrated spice, botanical, and vegetal notes dominating. Yes, there’s some honey, vanilla, bright fruit, and a hint of toffee, but it doesn’t help. Easily the weakest whiskey in this year’s Antique Collection, and a bit of a disappointment.
      		
 
			
 
Style: single grain Scotch whisky. Price: approx. $120. Available nationwide in limited quantities (imported by International Brands, 860/677-0473). 

      		
 
			
 
Light, crisp, and gently sweet. Notes of vanilla, cut hay, honey, and lemon, with a grainy, dry bourbon-oak finish. A warm weather whisky, or as an aperitif. Perhaps a way to introduce a vodka drinker to whiskey?
      		
 
			
 
Greenore is the grain whisky produced by Cooley, and as an 8 year old and a 15 year old it has proved to be a world beater.  Now it’s being marketed as the oldest Irish single grain whiskey in the world, and while there’s lots to recommend, this age might be a step too far. Lashings of banana and vanilla ice cream are up front, but then sharp salt and pepper slash across it and leave an astringent, puckerish mixed finish. 
      		
 
			
 
This may well be the perfect entry level Mackmyra. It has a lower strength, and is almost Mackmyra Lite, thinner and less peaky, peppery, and peaty than every other Mackmyra bottling. There’s a green fruit, almost gooseberry dimension to this; most unusual for the distillery, and the peaty underlay is fractured and dusty rather than sharp and intense. A revelation, and proof that the distillery is branching out. 
      		
 
			
 
Initial maturation in sherry and bourbon wood from the U.S. and Sweden, finished in fermented birch sap wine casks. Concentrated heather honey, wax, fresh mascarpone, fruit tarts, and toasted oak. It draws the mouth in: fruity, but not sweet. Stewed, dark fruits from the hedgerow and orchard (cherry, apple, plum, mulberry, and rhubarb), then a delayed splurge of spices and pepper, ending with Brazil nut, espresso, and bitter cacao. It’s all rather austere, serious, and forbidding. €65
      		
 
			
 
An equal marriage of Longmorn and Glen Moray whiskies. Quite a fruity adventure, with zingy notes of bramble, strawberry, rhubarb, sultana, nectarine, and plum. All this fruit sits on a bed of creamy vanilla malt (the Longmorn influence is quite evident) that coats the palate long after the finish.
      		
 
			
 
Consists of 60% Bowmore and 40% Caol Ila. Bold, youthful, and somewhat medicinal (as would be expected), with peat smoke, tar, pebbles on a beach, and boat docks. Additional flavors of smoked olives and exotic pepper add intrigue, while honeyed malt notes soothe the palate and provide balance.

-> On page 211 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Soft, gentle aroma, with notes of vanilla wafers, marzipan, and bramble. Continued soft, sweet, and creamy on the palate, with red and black currant, pear, subtle gin botanicals, and lingering anise on the finish. Good oak grit for such a young whisky, which helps to balance the sweetness. Fairly straightforward, as would be expected with such youthfulness, but very enjoyable. I wonder if this whisky is peaking at eight years old (or at least reached a plateau)? Certainly mature enough to enjoy now, but I would be curious to see this at 12 years old, where it might gain some additional depth and complexity, providing the oak is kept in check. 

      		
 
			
 
The price, the proof, and 8 years of age reflect the source: the Triple 8 distillery. Light fruit — white grapes, nectarine — and a bit of resiny plastic in the nose, plus a hint of wine wood, underlain by malt. Clean malt in the mouth, well-integrated with nothing sticking out or unbalanced. The fruit’s still there, but diminished; finish is a little clingy but clean. Nicely-made whisky…but it’s like a really good dish of vanilla ice cream; is that all? 
      		
 
			
 
Aggressive earthy smoke, tar, fiery pepper, bath soap, and ginger tamed by toffee and ripe malt. Lingering smoldering peat, anise, and tobacco. For those who like smoky whiskies young, aggressive, and unabashed.

      		
 
			
 
Nectarine, tangerine, toffee, and vanilla on the nose. There’s also teasing smoke, if you look for it. The sweet fruity notes start at the beginning of the palate, then cinnamon, nutmeg, cut hay, and smoke kick in. Lingering cracked pepper, clove, and distant smoke. Good gritty texture. Dynamic stuff for a young whisky.

      		
 
			
 
The problem with selling your whisky by description is that if you don't deliver what you've claimed in the name, you're in trouble. That's a little bit how it was with these whiskies when they were seven years old. At this age, though, these are big boy whiskies and there is plenty of peat, seaweed, oil, barbecued fish, and salty sea notes to keep you hooked. Nicely balanced with fruit, too.  £35
      		
 
			
 
A bit of heat, faint nose of putty, light brown sugar, and fully ripe grapes. Stand-up whisky: sweet grain, a bit of rye spice, oak notes, and a good release on the finish. Just a touch of hollow sweetness in the middle, a kind of flat spot.  
      		
 
			
 
8 years old and sherry finished, and it shows in the darker color. Sweet dark fruit aromas; a bit sugary. Waxy fruit and caramel, wood spice, and some oaky prickliness on center tongue as the whisky fades. More interesting than the standard, but a bit thick.  
      		
 
			
 
Oh! The glory of new wood. Even dialed back from 6 years old to 5 this version pushes Canadian Club’s entry level mixing whisky into sippin’ territory. The century-old formula is unchanged, but brand new oak emphasizes the rye grain while injecting soft oak caramels and crispy bright barrel notes into the familiar, peppery, overripe dark fruit of one of the world’s longest continuously produced whiskies. A long gingery finish touches on sweet grapefruit and chili peppers.
      		
 
			
 
Similar to the standard Amrut, except that it's drier and spicier, with suggestions of bourbon. Not as creamy as the standard expression, but a bit more sophisticated.
      		
 
			
 
Full port maturation has been tried by distilleries great and small. What does the cask contribute to the spirit beyond being soaked in port? Empress plums and bramble jelly meet smoke in the form of snuffed candlewicks and smoldering cedar sticks. At cask strength, it’s sharp and puckering but after the plummy opener fades there is rosehip, licorice, zested lime, and a squirt of lemon. Water keeps the licorice, but bottoms out the sweetness for a mouth-filling dram. £82
-> On page 212 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Quite fragrant and fairly sweet (but not cloyingly so), rich with nutty toffee, nougat, and bright summer fruits. Clean, gently sweet finish. Well rounded, nicely matured for its age and, at $30, a good value these days. A versatile whisky to keep in the drinks cabinet; it’s enjoyable enough sipping neat or with a splash of water, but (at this price) you won’t cringe if your guests drink it on the rocks or use it as a mixer. 
      		
 
			
 
Very mature for its age, and with great personality. It’s a fun, lively whisky, with tropical fruit (banana, peach, coconut), pineapple upside down cake, spring flowers, soft honeyed vanilla, fruit gumdrops, and chamomile tea. Clean, light, and slightly warming finish. Lovely now, but a whisky with great potential!  Price:31 (Sold in a three pack, consisting of new make spirit, 1 year old spirit, and 3 year old whisky: only in Belgium.)€31
      		
 
			
 
Youthful and fiery, oozing with testosterone. Toffee apple intoxicated with kiln-trapped peat smoke, charcoal ash, anise, honeyed malt, brine, peppered seaweed, kippers, and damp earth. Brisk and warming. Okay, this is a young, “in your face” Islay single malt. Young Islay whiskies show the true character of Islay (which I like), and this is a young one. Ideally, I’d like to see another five years, not chill-filtered, and bottled at 46% ABV, but there’s still a sort of “raw edge” attraction here.
      		
 
			
 
It was perhaps inevitable that a distillery employing whisky legend Iain Henderson would sooner or later release a heavily peated version of English whisky. Ironically, this is the first release on which current distiller David Fitt has tweaked Henderson’s recipe. He has not let anyone down. The peat doesn’t hide the sappy youthfulness here, but complements the sweet, creamy, malty heart, building with pepper to good effect. Another step in the right direction for this intriguing distillery. £45 (Currently not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Uh-oh. If I see the word “peated” with a sweet wine, I get nervous. As a mix, this is an accident waiting to happen; a great acrobatic trick that probably won't work. Two points here: one, the distillery is defining its citrusy and gritty DNA despite the diversity of releases. Two, this also pulls its punches…but it works. Yes, it's very sweet and liqueury, and yes there's peat — quite industrial here — but they stand on opposite sides of the dance floor and don't fight. £148
      		
 
			
 
Distiller Etienne Bouillon and two partners, farmer Pierre Roberti and financier Luc Foubert established Belgian Owl in 2004 in the barley-growing region of Hesbay, pressing a 19th century Swiss ambulatory alembic into service. Bouillon studied with Jim McEwan at Bruichladdich, and The Belgian Owl shows something of the Laddie’s master distiller’s love of sweet spirit aged in first-fill American oak. Stir in some cream, sweet peach, guava, and mango and you have a lush palate. The youth is indicated by a little green almond, while there is a soft crunch of barley on the tongue. €46 
      		
 
			
 
Tasmania may be setting itself up as the Speyside of Australia, but there are a growing number of distilleries on the mainland, such as Bakery Hill in Bayswater on the Dadenong foothills of Victoria, which was started by David Baker in 1999. Working with tall stills, his aim is to make a lightly fragrant spirit, and certainly that intense banana-like quality is there on nose and palate while the use of sherry casks adds a fruitcake and golden raisin depth. 
      		
 
			
 
The man behind this whisky is an acclaimed craft brewer, and on the strength of his early efforts this intriguing distillery is going to be winning plaudits from the world of whisky before too long. This single cask bottling steps over the hurdle of youthful sappy barley at its core, thanks to a big dose of wine-influenced spirit, which is liqueur-like; rich, full, and heavily berried. The killer, though, is the way the whisky goes up through the spice gears. €48 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Wheat whiskey, finished in huckleberry port barrels, showing a deep reddish blush, purple-pink around the edges. The fruity richness of the portwood is subdued, but present, and lays across everything else in the nose. Things become less one-dimensional on the palate, and the sweet broad grassiness of the wheat lightens the portwood influence somewhat, but it comes back in the finish. It’s a decent combo, but a bit of a one-note song. Price is per 375ml.
      		
 
			
 
Very Singleton of Dufftown: while that means easy drinking and approachable, it also
can suggest a single malt without a spark of wayward genius. This is,
typically, very ordered: nuts and honey with malt and pecan pie underneath. As
it opens there’s dried lemon, oak, dried fig, and (dilute) pencil shavings. The
palate is—typically—sweet and thick, though here with a refreshing sharpness,
like a mix of wine gums and cider. I’d add a rock or two of ice. 
£38/1 liter
-> On page 213 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Hazelburn CV is the non-age-statement version of Springbank’s unpeated, triple distilled single malt, introduced in 2010 to accompany the existing 8 and 12 year old variants. Initially slightly mashy and herbal on the nose, with acetone and cigarette packets. Citric and more malty with time. Orange, ginger, vanilla, and sherbet zest on the spicy palate. The finish is medium in length and spicy, with a slight suggestion of salt. A fresh, breezy, aperitif dram. £33 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Of all the flavors you’d expect to see in the moonshine space, coconut is probably the last. Stillhouse’s Coconut Moonshine has a coconut cream nose with a touch of milk chocolate that’s actually inviting. On the palate it’s creamy, chocolatey coconut with just a hint of corn whiskey. The mid-palate lacks some structure, with only a touch of spice. The finish is also a little muted, but damn if they didn’t make a coconut moonshine that isn’t horrid.
      		
 
			
 
The second craft rye I’m revisiting. Mosby’s is still 100% organic rye and unaged, but the nose is more fun: some green pear and melon esters in there with the grassy rye spice. It’s nicely smooth on the tongue, delivers exactly what the nose promised, plus a shot of fresh-cracked black pepper…and a much longer finish these days. Greatly improved; a good white whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
South Africa’s most established distillery now makes Scotch-style single malt whisky that the country can be proud of. The downside is that it plays it safe, and the flavors on offer are subdued and subtle. That said though, there’s plenty to like here — delicate floral notes including rose, with a rich and honeyed heart, traces of exotic fruits including kumquat and kiwi, wispy smoke, and some cinnamon and paprika. Solid. €47.50 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Master of Malt is an online whisky retailer, branching out with its own bottlings. This, from an unnamed distillery, is lightly honeyed with some quince, apricot, and yellow plum, while there’s a mix of vanillin and dry bracken/grass behind. Light, clean, and balanced, the palate is refined and relaxed with Demerara-like sweetness and a finish of honey-coated nuts. I wanted more oomph on the palate, which might have come at 43% or 46%. £100
      		
 
			
 
This laudable effort of comparative whiskies explores the effect of age by combining four parcels of stock in different proportions. The older whiskies produce an enticing nose of marmalade-encrusted ham on the bone, grist, and worn sandpaper. It’s sugary sweet with ripe melon before the sherry takes control and dishes out cherry candy and papaya. Held in the mouth, it develops layers of creamy latte and milk chocolate as the fruit fades. More to get your teeth into here. £54
      		
 
			
 
Batch 1 of this new blend brings oxidized apple, maple syrup, crispy potato skins, soft spices, and nutmeg grated over eggnog. Rich strands of citrus, mint, and raisins mingle, building in intensity to greater spiciness at the swallow, where ginger and burnt sugar emerges. Undiluted, there is a hot, spicy, slightly acrid finish dominated by the ginger. Water adds melon, mandarin, and apple and manages to keep the ginger in check. £40
      		
 
			
 
Young malt whisky. A rich but jumbled nose: cocoa, ripe grape, oak, and vanilla tumble and fight for your attention. A nicely rounded lighter whiskey in the mouth, though, and the cocoa cradles malt sweetness quite nicely...until the oak tears up the finish with a blast of hot spice. You almost want to keep sipping continuously to keep the finish from cutting in. Price is per 375ml.
      		
 
			
 
Thin corn sweetness, nice splash of mint and cinnamon. The whiskey's warm, but not hot, and it's exceptionally smooth. There's a slice of rye spice, and oaky vanilla, and the finish is clean and sweet. But it's almost too smooth, and not gutsy enough; if Stagg is bourbon turned up to eleven, this is at about six and a half. Cedar Ridge has a great start here; now show me more.
      		
 
			
 
Dark, hot brown sugar, sweet peppermint candy. A hot rye burner, but moderate on the palate: the heat's here, but the flavors come through clearly, in waves of mint, sugar, oily clove, and a brittle, sweet finish. This is no lapdog, but neither is it a clumsy, huge puppy; there's real rye character, the rough spots smoothed off by wood. A good young rye.
-> On page 214 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Sharpish nose, hot corn, peppermint, a bit of grape, and underlying cocoa. Sweet mouthful of vanilla and corn, the cocoa's here, and some oakspice. Finish is a bit rough and hot, but not unpleasant. This works better than the sherry-assisted takeoff of their rye whiskey. Could be more rounded, but it's well-constructed and solid.
      		
 
			
 
Spice nose, but some alcohol notes put a hot twist to it. A blast of baking spices — nutmeg, anise, allspice, mace — hits the palate, along with shots of citrus and vanilla that take a while to get organized and settled down, leading to a sweet finish where the orange dominates. If Spicebox is a fireside drink, this is a snowy woods outdoors drink; a bit hotter, more rustic, more rough. 
      		
 
			
 
Easy-going and uncluttered, but also not very complex. Balanced, straightforward notes of caramel, vanilla, creamed corn, subtle fruit, soft mint, and delicate cinnamon. A versatile bourbon: you won’t feel guilty using it in a cocktail, and it will do in a pinch to drink neat or with a splash of water.  
      		
 
			
 
Mashbill of corn, smoked barley, rye, and wheat, and a ruddy, almost garnet color to it. Smells like barrel drool in a rickhouse; kinda raunchy and sweet, with broad notes of vanilla and hot corn. Quite a mouthful at 100 proof, and after a short initial wave of sweet, the smoke shouts through, squeezing and wringing the other flavors dry, right through the finish. Water makes it paradoxically hotter. 
      		
 
			
 
Quite dark brown in the glass, and lots of vanilla and fruit — white grapes, pear — in the nose, with a sweet, clean floral character as well; a rich nose. Vibrant with malt and vanilla in the mouth, rather hot without water, and shot through with oakspice, which dominates the finish, though the vanilla struggles through. Water helps the heat in the middle, but not the finish. Texas is pretty darned hot!
      		
 
			
 
A restrained nose of fresh-cut oak, grassy rye, and a fleeting trace of solvents. Quite sweet in the mouth, spicy and minty, and the alcohol is fiery: this is young rye. Still, it's much less forward and rudely insistent than I'd expected; not at all the ripsnorter some young ryes are. This could be pleasant, but the finish is a letdown: sweet, mealy, uninspiring.
      		
 
			
 
There are now fourteen distilleries in Sweden. This is the second one after Mackmyra to start bottling whisky, and it's rather good. It's clearly young, but there are big flavors here, including blackcurrant and rich citrus fruits early on, then a Highland-style earthiness toward the end, with distinctive peat lasting longest into the finish. There is a lot to like here, and with age the line between fruit and peat will become more blurred. 1295 SEK
      		
 
			
 
Standard bottling benchmark. Smells sweet, caramel and toffee, with some alcohol heat and a slight medicinal twang. Strong caramel flavor (is that where that rich amber color came from?), not particularly deep or complex, but not hot or flawed either, leading to a gentle sweet finish. Not bad at all for a mixing whisky.  
      		
 
			
 
Canadian whisky is sweeter to start with, and so may well be a natural base for flavors. It certainly seems that way with this underpriced example. The nose is like restrained caramel candy, a fairly deep note of toasted sugar. The drink itself is sweet, but doesn’t cling, and is crying for a bit of fizz, or some ice cream to drape itself over. Not bad at all for the price. 
      		
 
			
 
Sweet Canadian whisky nose, taffy, some vanilla. Taste is fairly rich, with notes of port and light cocoa, leading to a clean finish with a good grip. Not a tremendously deep whisky, but approachable and free of flaws. 
-> On page 215 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Aged in new charred oak, then finished in “white wine-seasoned French oak.” Tight, sawdusty, bitter nose. A lot of wood here, going in different directions. First hit is the American oak (vanilla, rich spice), followed quickly by creamy French oak, then comes a wave of fruity wine wood character. Full in the mouth, and a thick finish. Interesting, but not particularly well integrated; maybe a case of “just because you can, doesn’t mean you should.” Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
There’s a hot, brittle nose of sweet spice, like a cinnamon Red Hot floating in alcohol, with a softer backing of cornmeal underneath. This is a well-behaved bourbon in the mouth; no off-flavors, easy to hold on the tongue, with more corn than spice now, and a lack of wood until the finish, when it wraps in on the corn to dry things up a bit. Simple, sweet, a little spicy, and really easy to drink; a good start.  
      		
 
			
 
Clear as Cave Spring water, a mashbill of 70% rye, “mellowed” by charcoal, and ignorant of barrel-aging. It is white dog-brash: fresh wet grain, trampled grass, and a salty tinge. The spirit is pleasurably smooth and cool, sweet in body with a bitter film of rye spice. A gentlemanly clear spirit that’s itching to get into a cocktail; my only real complaint is the price. (This is “a taste of what’s to come,” so expect an aged rye to follow.)
      		
 
			
 
Like the other Taos Lightning Rye, there’s an MGP provenance that’s topped with local aging; it is stated to be a 5 year old whiskey. There’s the signature brittle-dry mint of this mashbill, some hot oak and shortbread. The mouth is quick, spicy, and hot, but not over-balanced in any direction. Good, but not setting off the shock and awe.
      		
 
			
 
An estate white whiskey: the corn in this spirit was all grown and harvested on the Myer farm, a Finger Lakes farm dating back to the 1860s. The nose is clean and green, a focused blast of unmodified corn. The spirit is zesty and fresh, sweet and grassy/minty; easy to hold on the tongue until a final heat that fires the finish. If the finish were a bit smoother…still quite good for unaged whiskey.  
      		
 
			
 
Unaged corn whiskey from Philadelphia. The distinctive white corn spirit smell: crushed corn leaves, wet cornmeal, hint of fruit and split stone. A singular flavor, though: the usual flabby, green sweetness isn’t here. Instead, there’s a dry, solid corn flavor, something that tastes complete, arrived. I could ask for more complexity, but the focused, dry intensity of it has a singular appeal, asking only ice — or a lager chaser — to make a great afternoon.  
      		
 
			
 
A soft wadding of port gently prods the senses, producing a nose like a tincture from the hedgerows: redcurrant, raspberry, hawthorn, elderberry, and fresh, grassy notes with an accompaniment of waxed thornproof jackets, star anise, cardamom, and muted cloves. After maturation in 100-liter French oak quarter casks, the mouthfeel is thinner than expected. It’s like sinking your teeth into a slice of watermelon. There’s raspberry, Kola Kubes, and a touch of bitterness before a sticky finish. £140
      		
 
			
 
I'm really excited that new world whiskey makers and independents are challenging the way we think about whiskey. But there are concerns, too, such as flavored whiskeys, and white spirit sold as the finished article. Poitín is an Irish pauper's spirit made illegally, so legal definitions are patchy. It is normally made with potatoes. This is a mix of new make Irish single malt and new make Irish grain. It tastes like new make Irish whiskey. End of story.
      		
 
			
 
Not cheap sugar “squeezins,” this is mashed from 50% corn and 50% cane sugar, run on an alembic still by two Beams whose great-grandfathers were J.W. Dant and Minor Case Beam: some credibility. Clear as glass, a big corn nose tinged with light caramel and violets. Nicely sweet and warm, grassy-fresh and east to hold in the mouth. Clean, straightforward stuff. 
      		
 
			
 
Made in Washington State with Washington barley in a copper pot still, and aged “over a year” in new, charred, 10 gallon oak barrels. Good color; nose is frisky and young, with fresh oak and big pear aromas, and a hot feel. Hot and direct in the mouth: grainy, some of that pear, and a somewhat bland but appealing cereal sweetness. Finish is more of the same, with a flick of heat at the end. 
-> On page 216 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
12 year old 100% Canadian rye-grain whisky is transported from Canada to Hood River Distillers’ plant in Oregon where, after adding glacier water from Mt. Hood, it is bottled. Tart lime juice, ginger, and seething pepper brighten a rich combination of vanilla, butterscotch, and maple fudge. Crisp charred oak meets wet slate as raisins meld into floral notes with tinges of Canada balsam and fresh-cut pine. This rich, weighty, well-balanced whisky is decidedly fresh and exuberant.
      		
 
			
 
In blended whisky terms, this isn’t for the faint-hearted, and joins a number of recent releases prepared to show off its
darker, grittier side. It’s a big flavored blend, with its heart in the islands, and with oily coastal notes reminiscent of a delicatessen: brine, salty cheese, some crab apple relish, and smoked fish. It’s a rugged bruiser, but it makes its mark with some style.
      		
 
			
 
Standard blends fall into two categories: those that will behave nicely when mixed to offer almost non-whisky experience, and those that are feistier and want to make sure you know they’re there. This is the former, and with whiskies like this one, it’s possible to blink and miss it. That doesn’t make it bad; just indistinctive and unexceptional. There is little sign of the wood here, but the delicate, sweet apricot notes just do enough.
      		
 
			
 
No age statement, “charcoal filtered.” Hard candy/sweet-spicy nose with some wood edginess, stewed corn, and mineral notes; not particularly well-integrated. The thin body flashes vanilla and light caramel across the tongue as some hot oak fires things up. On the lean side, and like most such bourbons, the finish lingers, and flares at each swallow: oak, cinnamon, and that same mineral note. Not bad, but it needs more. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Simple nose of sweet cornbread and oaky caramel; nothing fancy, but nothing wrong. The nose is no liar; same tastes in the
mouth, just a bit hotter on the oak. Good finish with a nice oaky linger. The letdown is the thin body, which adds to the heat and steals from the experience. Seems more like a good shot bourbon or an “…and ginger ale” bourbon, not a sipping bourbon. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Alberta’s Liquor Depot has chosen a tiny Ontario distillery for an exclusive single malt bottling. Still Waters, in Toronto, is Canada’s first craft distillery to bottle single malt whisky. This one is peppery hot and bathed in sweet barley sugar, clover honey, and rich oaky caramels. Brisk, nutty, and oaky, it remains sweet, with green pears. A weighty body, with grassiness, dry grain, and hot white pepper, typifies Still Waters’ emerging house style. (
C$70
      		
 
			
 
This sweet, peppery dram secures Still Waters’ reputation for single malt prodigies: young whiskies mature beyond their years. Cinnamon, enhanced by mild herbal bitterness, rides waves of barley sugar. Sweetness and heat grow stronger as the whisky sits in your mouth. Water brings grassiness to the nose and cooked cream of wheat to the palate. Mid-palate hints of celery add breadth while linseed oil, earthy blue clay, and hints of eucalyptus linger in a long peppery finish. (
      		
 
			
 
Still Waters distillery’s owners invited customers to select their next single cask release. Noting the soft cereal notes, stewed apples and raisins, and hot spices in an oily body, they recommended this one. A fruity nose with barrel tones and icing sugar blossoms in the glass while the hot, spicy palate shows hints of licorice, cloves, and vanilla. A good dash of water mollifies a drying tendency without dampening the flavor or creaminess. (
C$100
      		
 
			
 
Aggressive nose of bitter orange, dark chocolate, and pine comes boiling out of the glass. More gentle on the palate: the same notes, but wrapped in sweet malt. A bit hot and crinkly on the tongue, an assertive whisky, but it fades quickly at the end. Good flavor, but a lack of depth; everything Defiant has is right there on top, there’s nothing to discover. The pine is off-putting, too; not sure where that’s coming from.
      		
 
			
 
Clean nose, hard grain, some grassy sweetness, a bit perfumey. Interesting on the tongue: grain, sweet orange, and meadow grass; has a pleasantly creamy texture. Gets just a bit solvent-touched at the finish, but overall, an interesting sip…which brings up the question again: what are these ‘white whiskeys’ for? Cocktails, highballs, neat sipping? This one, I think, could pull off all three, the kind of white whiskey that compares to white rum. Sourced whiskey.
-> On page 217 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
This single cask (#10328) bottling was distilled in the summer of 2006 and matured in a refill hogshead. The nose is initially slightly mashy, with savory notes, becoming more floral, with caramel. Bold and spicy on the palate, with roasted meat and underlying citrus fruit and herbal notes. Mildly metallic dark chocolate in the medium-length finish.  £42
      		
 
			
 
Light gold. A little shy initially, but Glenallachie isn’t noted for its effusiveness. It has a clean and slightly nutty aroma, with light honey alongside grilled hazelnut. The palate is fairly crisp and slightly bunched up to start, until this nutty sweetness expands in the center. Ever so slightly oily. Water flattens the aromatics a bit, but allows the flavors to spread gently. All in all, a decent example of an uncommonly seen single malt. £85
      		
 
			
 
An 11 year old Fettercairn from Douglas Laing, this is an undemanding but pleasing Highland dram. It comes from a distillery which tends to polarize opinion among drinkers. The nose is light and crisp, slightly floral, with pear juice and a hint of honey. Sweet and spicy on the palate, with hazelnuts and drinking chocolate. Powdery in the finish, with tangerines and a suggestion of Parma violets. £37
      		
 
			
 
Whiskies from undisclosed Speyside and Highland distilleries are blended together in first-fill sherry butts. On the nose it’s an alluring blend of orange, cherry, toffee, salt, and ginger. The entry follows the nose with toffee, orange, ginger, and malt. Things begin to drop off in the mid-palate, which is very focused on salt and ginger, with strong alcohol undertones. The alcohol drives and defines a dry finish that's absent of much of what's so alluring about this whisky. (
)
      		
 
			
 
Gold. Quite sweet and spicy nose. Light cinnamon and that distillery ginger edge. There remains a light cereal aspect to the background, but it is considerably more youthful than the age suggests. The palate is equally sweet and direct, with excellent spicy concentration. Water shows that there is some weight here, reminiscent of honey-nut cornflakes (with cream). The nose now hints at some oxidation, the palate retains peppery freshness. It’s another I’d have kept in cask. £135
      		
 
			
 
Naming your blend “Sherry Cask” retains an air of ambiguity to it. Theoretically, it could be the maturation or finishing vessel for all or some of the constituents. The whisky is light-bodied and the sweet sherry is evident, though a nip of bitterness interrupts. Smoother on the palate than the 12 year old, there’s strawberry, raspberry, and background spice, with a blackberry note late in the finish. Overall, there’s less flavor development, but it’s an old-school kind of blend.
      		
 
			
 
An official Strathclyde from Chivas Bros., presented in its squat bottle from their under-appreciated Cask Strength Edition series. I found a peculiar nose comprising shafts of lemongrass, garlic bulb, root ginger, taffy candy, and green tea. As an Iron Dram, it’s oily and bold, with coconut, fresh mint, and green pea, with a savory note tugging at the taste buds. Dilution highlights scallions, a light creamy toffee, and Reese’s peanut butter cups. Curiously intriguing: for bold flavor explorers only. £43
      		
 
			
 
Sharp nose of fresh, wet grain, hot honey, a little butterscotch, crushed boxwood leaves, and a touch of linseed; an herbal smell. Mouth is roundly sweet, with honey and pie crust notes that meet the oak and pretty it up. There’s mint here, which surprised me; maybe from the wood? This one’s dainty, delicate, and maybe a bit too sweet, but it maintains an edge of oak that keeps it serious. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Malt whiskey with a mashbill similar to a craft-brewed stout—think dark roasted malts—and then aged in new charred oak with an addition of toasted French oak. The nose is sweet young malt touched with chocolate. There’s an additional hit of cocoa at first taste, then heat, oak, vanilla, and more sweet malt, followed by a finish that’s increasingly chocolatey and dry. Young, and could use more complexity and maturing, but full of good flavors. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Following in the footsteps of Bushmills Irish Honey, Castle Brands tries their hand at a light and sweet Irish whiskey-based liqueur. Strong clover honey dominates with caramel, vanilla bean, cinnamon, and a little ginger spice. Hard to get to the base whiskey through all the sweet notes, but that seems to be the point. Just short of cloying, this is a whiskey-based liqueur for those more interested in the liqueur than the whiskey.
-> On page 218 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
William Grant’s answer to Drambuie is a much less sweet and higher proof Irish whiskey-based liqueur. Monster caramel leaps out of the glass with an undercurrent of cola. Caramel leads to chocolate on the palate before malt and grain whiskey undertones emerge. Mid-palate is a little hot, but it helps cut through the underlying sweetness and also features some botanicals like juniper and black pepper. Clearly a mixing spirit and probably best thrown into a cola or ginger ale.
      		
 
			
 
Massive with a huge sherried attack; seven years is the right time to bottle. There’s light raisin, date, and fig roll/treacle toffee, but it’s a funny one as it develops; while it is superficially impressive, it becomes clear that the oak-driven and distillery-derived parts, aren’t talking to each other. Water brings out light cask-driven sulfur. On the palate, the black fruits and Demerara rum take initial charge along with menthol. It’s tannic already, though. Lacks integration, but what else to do?
      		
 
			
 
Despite the common Heaven Hill origin, this is not the same stuff as Dant. The nose is focused, dry, integrated: sweet corn, the inside of an old wooden drawer, and a flip of sweet spice. Lively in the mouth, almost playfully light: corn fritters and filigreed oak. If you mix this, go light; this is not a heavy bonded trooper. One cube, a small splash; then enjoy the delicacy.
      		
 
			
 
Unaged. Richly sweet with corn, and a bit of new make funk. Replicated very closely on the tongue: alcohol heat, corn sweetness, wild flowers/stems, and faint notes of overripe fruit, with some drying minerality on the finish. Interesting where it’s not clean; a balance of craft and cunning.
      		
 
			
 
An aperitif-style aged Irish whiskey which plays in harmony with the fresh American oak bourbon casks. A light, fragrant nose of spring blossoms, waxed lemons, cinnamon sticks, pears in golden syrup, marshmallows, and fresh laundry. There is decent weight and structure here. Sharp acidity of peel scattered over lemon meringue pie, cinnamon, black pepper, and a finish of creamy fudge dipped in milk chocolate. Water pries open a hitherto-hidden waxy consistency (6,000 bottles released)
      		
 
			
 
Delicate nose of sherbet and melting heather honey layered over pleasant grassy and herbal notes. The texture is sweet, thin, and syrupy, with a slight vegetal note, before salted caramel reels it in, brimming over into a briny finish like a salty kiss. The grain clearly plays a major role. Truth be told, the aromas and flavors work well, but the lack of weight makes it feel like a tiddler rather than catch of the day. (
).
      		
 
			
 
Corn and oak on the nose, with a slice of fruit from sherry cask aging. Nose is strikingly different from the other two Hillrocks reviewed; sweeter, and softer. It’s clearly bourbon at the front, but as the flavors move back in the mouth and into the finish, the sherry takes over and dominates, becoming quite fruity at the close, though with a firm grip of charred oak. The sherry’s too much for a bourbon, especially at this price. Partially sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Part of this Pittsburgh distillery’s series of “Whims” one-offs. Truly interesting nose: a combination of new-barrel bourbon reek and Irish raw barley grassiness, yielding mint, vanilla, juicy wet grain, and faint cinnamon. Hot entry of vanilla and small-barrel oak, which suddenly collapses to a dry cocoa sweetness spiked with hot pepper, like Mexican chocolate. This typifies a lot of craft efforts: not a great whiskey now, but one with terrifically interesting potential. I hope Wigle pursues this Whim. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
I reviewed a couple of these one-off Wigle Whims earlier. This one’s quite roasty indeed, almost coffee-like, made with roasted barley and wheat, and caramel and chocolate malts. It smells of burnt grain with sweet toffee underneath. Lots of chocolate and cocoa struggle with ash and burnt grain, leading to a hot finish where they end up, finally, in agreement, a smoky mocha mouthful, espresso whiskey. Invigorating. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Balance makes this simple session whisky a well-loved hot Sunday sipper, while searing pepper and vanilla-rich butterscotch lend it well to mixing. Order rye and ginger in a bar in Canada and you may well find yourself savoring Special Old. Toffee with hints of ginger on the nose broaden into blazing chilies with notes of cloves and cinnamon. Soft barrel notes, damp earth, and sweet toffee segue neatly into a very long, hot, bitter, cleansing finale. 
-> On page 219 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Originating from Cooley distillery, this whiskey spent a decade in a first-fill bourbon cask before a period of extra maturation in a Vinhos Barbeito madeira cask, and the influence is unmistakable on the nose. Additionally, there is vanilla icing, brown bananas, sprigs of wild mint, and a savory note of smoked duck. It’s a soft, buttery experience with honey, mandarin, guava, banana, and light spices. Dry, short, sweet finish but the Madeira tips the balance. (377 bottles) €125
      		
 
			
 
This is the foundation stone of the whole Label 5 range and it’s a solid, reputable blend that works neat, with a rock of ice, or in cocktails. The digestive biscuits, dark walnut toffee, and fruit salad aromas concede to a rather inauspicious palate of burnt orange, malt biscuits, charred oak, and ground ginger. It’s lively through to its malt and spice conclusion.
      		
 
			
 
Onyx (East Hartford, Conn.) ages their 'moonshine' in new charred oak barrels to make this expression.  Nose is fresh-sawn oak and sugar cookies, with a bit of cinnamon spice. Tons of fresh oak in the mouth (I'd guess this is small-barrel whiskey) with a spicy sweetness, a hallmark of young craft whiskey, as is the quick finish. Still, no real flaws, and pleasant enough.
      		
 
			
 
Unripe pears, honeycomb, strawberry 
, and vanilla custard. A light and pleasant expression, but it’s not the kind of complex dram that will hold your attention all night. This batch of unpeated 5 year old single malt from St. George was disgorged from just four American standard barrels, and the taste consists of waxy lemons, vanilla cream, and banana splits, with a growing caramel presence. A dry finish of light spices and sweet lemon. £45
      		
 
			
 
The newest offering from Crown Royal. Drier and more spice, with less of the creaminess of its siblings. I enjoy the subtle, dry complexity on the nose and the promise on the first part of the palate. But the whisky quickly turns quite dry on the latter part, with the oak playing the dominant role. XR contains older whiskies (including some from the old Waterloo distillery), so this is a rare whisky indeed, but it is difficult to improve on the profound effort of Crown Royal Special Reserve. 

      		
 
			
 
Light in body and on the nose, but clean and elegant. Notes of delicate fruit, vanilla, and honey, with a touch of caramel and coconut cream. Soft, clean finish. A pleasant, conservative whisky.
      		
 
			
 
Whisky maker John Hall says value whiskies save used barrels from being wasted. Study the label and you’ll find this lush mixer hails from Hall’s Forty Creek distillery. Sweet voluptuous butterscotch and corn syrup slather peppery heat and the mildest tannins. The pepper turns ticklish on the roof of your mouth until charred wood, burned toffee, and vanilla custard flow over it. Simple but very sippable, it’s a bit luxurious for a mixing whisky. (
C$24
      		
 
			
 
Some of these older Duncan Taylor grain whiskies are very individualistic and exciting. With others, the wood has gotten the best of them (Grain whiskies are light in body and thus vulnerable to excessive oak aging). This one, fortunately, gravitates more towards the former, with a rather reserved oak influence, given its age. A bit tight on the nose. Rather sweet too, and somewhat viscous. Notes of vanilla, crème brulee, marzipan, caramel-coated popcorn, brown sugar, toasted coconut, and subtle pineapple and papaya. A gentle dried spice finish rescues the whisky from all the sweetness.

      		
 
			
 
Background on the Master’s Collection: this is the fourth of the 100% pot still whiskeys from Woodford Reserve in their Master’s Collection series (the previous being two different Four Grain releases and a Sonoma-Cutrer wine finish expression). All four have a common pot still character to them, and their flavors really expand most bourbon drinkers’ concept of bourbon. The second batch of Four Grain is still my clear favorite of the releases so far. It’s balanced and complex.

1838 Sweet Mash review: Burnt orange/amber color. Sweet, fruity, and spicy on the nose and palate. Notes of orchard fruit (peach, apple), golden raisin, bramble, and spice (cinnamon, evergreen, nutmeg, and clove) on a bed of sweetness (maple syrup and honey). It’s thick and viscous in texture and quite sweet on the front end of the palate, but dried spices and oak emerge mid-palate and rescue it. Long, spicy, resinous finish. I would rather the whisky didn’t go from predominantly sweet to mostly dry and gritty. I wish these two components were better integrated. If they were, I would have rated this whiskey higher.
      		
 
			
 
Aged in American oak, and then finished in maple, sherry, and portwood. The nose is intriguing and entertaining, but the palate loses me. At the beginning, it’s sweet to the point of bordering on cloying, and then there’s an emergence of flavors (wood spice, stewed fruit, caramel, etc.) that turns very busy and lacks integration. The flavors just don’t play well with each other. To me, the whiskey is trying too hard to impress and achieves the opposite.
-> On page 220 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Finished in pinot noir barrels. A very fruit-forward whiskey. I love bourbon, and I love pinot noir, but the wine influence is very intense and, to me, the flavors don’t integrate well. Cherries, red raspberry, and red currant dominate, along with a coating of caramel. Cinnamon and clove struggle to emerge from underneath it all. Sweet, fruity finish. Bonus points for uniqueness, but a bit overdone with the wine influence.
      		
 
			
 
Aged in French oak chardonnay barrels for eight years after ten years in new oak. The oak influence is significantly greater in this bottling. Briefly sweet up front, with caramel, vanilla, candied fruit, and golden raisin. Then the oak resin, leather, and tobacco leaves take over, along with subtle black licorice stick. The dry oak finish lingers. 

      		
 
			
 
Much more oak influence than its younger sibling. That lovely sweetness of the 19 year old Experimental Collection Giant French Oak Barrel bottling is there at the beginning, but it’s quickly overtaken by oak spice, leather, and tannin notes. This one was left in the barrel a bit longer than I would prefer. If you like a wood-driven whiskey, then consider trying it. But if it’s balance you desire, look elsewhere.  Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Light in body, with soft fruit, graham cracker, and delicate honey. Oak tannin, leather, and prickly spice kick in mid-palate, but there’s not enough body and sweet notes to balance it.  Warm, spicy finish. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Antique amber in color. Deep, mature aromas of toffee, wood spices, mint and leather. Medium in body. The flavor begins sweet, with honeyed vanilla and toffee notes, evolving to dried fruit and spices, and then becoming dry, woody and a bit hot. Long, dry finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Darker, more lush, and with less of the crisp, lively spice notes when compared to last year’s vintage. (Keep in mind that single cask bottlings vary from cask to cask.) The predominant component of the new vintage is its layers of sweetness (toffee, molasses, vanilla fudge, and candy corn), with underlying nougat and glazed fruit. An enjoyable, soothing bourbon, but I would like to see more spice and fruit to go with the sweet notes. This whiskey will work nicely after dinner (perhaps with a cigar?) 

      		
 
			
 
Nice balance of honeyed vanilla, caramel, soft oak, with hints of summer fruits and creamy coconut on both the nose and palate. Soft, lightly dried spice notes emerge on a pleasant, albeit brief, finish. Economically priced to use as a mixer or on the rocks, but good enough to drink neat or with a splash of water. A highly versatile bourbon.
      		
 
			
 
Style: Kentucky straight bourbon whiskey Color: Amber Aroma: Clean, uncomplicated. Notes of caramel, teaberry, delicate candied fruit, and vanilla. Subtle notes of sweet corn and spice (mint). Palate: Well balanced. Similar to its aroma, but with more dry, spicy notes and less of the sweetness than the nose would suggest. Clean, pleasant finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Youthful in nature, and fairly straight-forward. Fresh, minty spice notes accompany some candied citrus fruit and some light toffee. What’s there is pleasing enough. I just wish there was more there (in both flavor and depth). 

      		
 
			
 
Style: American whiskey Color: Amber with streaks of gold. Aroma: Layers of sweetness: concentrated vanilla, marshmallow, taffy, white chocolate and caramel. Subtle, underlying fruit. Palate: Again the layers of sweetness, but not to the point of being cloying or unpleasant-underlying notes of oak and minty, resinous spices emerge mid-palate and cut through the sweetness to keep it from dominating too much. Sweet and spicy finish. 

-> On page 221 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
A fruity-sweet whisky (but still quite light and lively), with notes of orange marmalade, lemon meringue pie, and apricot. There’s also an underlying vanilla maltiness that is balanced nicely by oak spice on the finish. A respectable effort for a 10 year old and versatile enough to drink any time of the day (but I would prefer it before dinner). 

      		
 
			
 
Light, clean, and delicate on the palate, with creamy vanilla, marshmallow, soft fruit (lemon, lime), and a touch of honey throughout. Nicely balanced and uncomplicated. A whisky to appeal to both the malt and blend drinker. 

      		
 
			
 
Surprisingly thick and oily in texture for a Lowlander. There’s plenty of marshmallow, vanilla cream, and ripe barley, with interspersed cut grass, lemon, and mustard seed. Drying oak spice notes on the finish. Not as polished or refined as the distillery bottling of the same age, but it still has many redeeming qualities. 

      		
 
			
 
Gordon & MacPhail purchased the Benromach distillery from United Distillers and reopened the distillery in 1998. They installed new stills and are using malt with a recognizable level of peating. This is first official bottling from the whisky that they themselves have made. The whisky is still youthful, but for a whisky of such youth it shows great balance, individuality, and promise. Notes of vanilla cream, honey, and fruit (pineapple, pear) are peppered with nuances of smoke, herbs, and pine. Youthful, vibrant finish. I eagerly look forward to tasting this whisky with a half dozen more years of aging. 

      		
 
			
 
Nicely balanced, and easy to drink. Pit fruits (peaches, apricots) and lemon are the dominant notes, with underlying vanilla cream, butterscotch, and a hint of honey. Gently dry, delicately spicy finish. The most rounded of the four. 

      		
 
			
 
Full gold color. Layers of citrus fruit on the nose (especially Seville orange, lemon, grapefruit), with just a faint hint of peat smoke and floral, herbal notes. Light to medium in body. It tastes similar in many ways to its aroma-there’s plenty of citrus fruit. The fruit comes first, followed by the classic "older Bowmore" oaky dryness. An echo of flavors repeats this sequence-first the citrus fruit, then the dry oak flavors. Some peat smoke teases in the background, but is mostly restrained. Fry, oaky, faintly peaty finish.

   Style: Islay single malt Scotch whisky. Price: approx. $160. Available at select retailers. 

   This whisky is classic older Bowmore (30+ years), with its exotic citrus fruit, distinctive oaky dryness, and faintest hint of peat smoke. 
      		
 
			
 
Its color suggests sherry cask influence, and its aroma confirms. The initial impact on the palate is lush fruit, followed by a clean honeyed malt foundation. Toffee and nuts emerge, with that satisfying Bruichladdich freshness and brine kicking in on the finish, providing some balance for the somewhat waxy, sherried sweetness. (A Park Avenue Liquors exclusive.) 

      		
 
			
 
This Caol Ila was released the same time as the 12 year old, reviewed above. Older isn't always better, especially with Islay whiskies. I felt that way when comparing Ardbeg 17 to Ardbeg 10 year old, and I feel the same with these two Caol Ila whiskies. This 18 year old has the same flavor profile as the 12 year old. It's a well-rounded dram too, but it has lost the vibrancy and dynamic intensity of the 12 year old. If you want to experience Caol Ila in its entire youthful splendor-and save a few bucks while you're at it-then buy the 12 year old.
      		
 
			
 
Mature and gentle, when compared to the 1990 expression above. If the flavors of the 1990 Caol Ila reviewed above are nakedly exposed, then this Caol Ila is wearing a winter coat. The same flavor notes are there, but they’re less noticeable. Pleasingly salty, gently drying finish. 

      		
 
			
 
An established regular member of Diageo’s annual set of Special Releases, this expression celebrates the lesser-known side of Islay’s largest distillery; its production of a non-smoked expression. It was this unpeated style that saved Caol Ila during the great decimation of distilleries in the early 1980s. This example is intense and needs LOTS of water for its fragrance of cut grass, sherbet, and coconut water to emerge. The palate shows boiled sweets and has a pleasingly clinging quality. £53 
-> On page 222 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Initially what we have are classic Caol Ila notes: cod liver oil, soft pear-like fruits, and a glimpse of lobster cooked in sea water. It’s not so much smoky as ozonic and, though it seems a little exposed with water, there’s a squeeze of lemon (for the lobster, maybe). On the tongue there’s a light ashy note before the mouth is slowly filled. Any smoke is in check and understated. This is about citric freshness and salt. £70
      		
 
			
 
Thick in texture and palate-coating. Ripe peaches and bananas, orange chocolate, English toffee, and a hint of damp oak on the nose. I can also detect brine, seaweed, peat smoke, and spice, but it’s a little clumsy. Same story on the palate. Not a bad whisky, but I expect more from Clynelish. 

      		
 
			
 
Light straw. Initially this is quite hot and a little dumb, with whiffs of Indian spice — think turmeric and curry leaf — along with mint sauce (but no lamb) and a tickle of peat. The palate is quite intense and hot, with powdered almond, a grassy edge, and concentrated sweetness that starts in the center and builds toward the back palate. Subtle, but can’t help wishing there was just a little more say from the cask. £59
      		
 
			
 
From a sherry hogshead, which is confirmed by its deep amber/crimson color. A very clean whisky for 31 years in oak, and its complexity is subtle. It’s sort of the antithesis of the Blackadder Longmorn also reviewed here. Both are heavily sherried. The Longmorn shows its age proudly, and is bold, complex, and a bit rustic. This one is clean, more conservative, and nicely balanced. You’ll find notes of honey-laced fruit, caramel, and toffee, with an infusion of nutty, ginger-spiced notes, leading to a polished oak finish. A straight-forward and uncomplicated Speysider. 

      		
 
			
 
Light (for a Speysider), floral, fresh, and elegant, showing honeyed vanilla and lively fruit, along with a hint of marshmallow and hay. Soft, dry finish. Pleasant, straightforward, and uncomplicated. A good clean introductory malt that’s easy to embrace. 

      		
 
			
 
The first official distillery release to the U.S. since the distillery was purchased by Angus Dundee. This is a thick, mouth-coating whisky. Notes of ripe malt, toffee, sweet berries, and caramel apples. It dries out quite nicely towards the finish, with spicy oak notes to keep it from becoming too cloying. 

      		
 
			
 
More of a reddish hue, but as equally robust as the 1961 (see below). Some baked characters alongside dried cherry and barberry, which shift toward balsamic-like concentration. Hint of black pudding (blood sausage) and bitter chocolate. The palate is tight and tannic, with a hint of smoke and cooked dried fruits. Water loosens the tannic grip, allowing licorice to show. (A U.S. exclusive.)
      		
 
			
 
Bottled for this auspicious occasion, this is a Glenfiddich that confounds people’s expectations by being smoky, not from casks (à la Caoran) but the distillate. Fresh, with a nose that brings to mind eating apples and hazelnuts around a late summer bonfire; the smoke seems in charge. On the palate, the reverse happens, with the fruits being thrust forward and the smoke only emerging on the finish. It’s vibrant and needs water, and is a lot of fun. Happy Birthday! (Travel Retail and distillery shop exclusive)£70  
      		
 
			
 
Like Dalwhinnie, Glenkinchie starts life as a (deliberately) sulfury new make, but this character falls away in time to reveal delicacy. As a 10 year old, that sulfur could still be hanging around — one reason for the switch to a 12 year age statement. The improvement is noticeable. Here are gently lifted floral notes, hints of dry grass, and crisp pear. The feel is gentle and slow in the center, while vanilla creeps into the finish. Not complex, but very pleasant.
      		
 
			
 
A limited edition—there are only 630 bottles of this—for those who are “Glenlivet Guardians.” A sherry refill, it’s a gentle expression that has typical Glenlivet floral elements that are more lifted than usual: elderflower cordial, jasmine, and night-scented stocks. A subtle spiciness emerges with a drop of water. This general smoothness continues on the palate with ginger in syrup and an enlivening citric note on the finish. 
-> On page 223 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Very fragrant and floral, with bright notes of citrus (lemons, orange) and fresh grass. Similar on the palate, with additional notes of soft honeyed malt and vanilla. Clean, fresh, appetizing finish. A nice aperitif or, better yet, a liquid sorbet between courses. 

      		
 
			
 
Gently sweet, with toffee, nougat, and honey-glazed nuts, balanced by bright citrus and sultana. A soothing, unpretentious, malt I would save for after dinner. 

      		
 
			
 
Generally sweet notes of honeyed fruit, orange marmalade, dark chocolate, and salt water taffy. Soft, gently briny finish. Pleasing enough of a whisky -- with no miscues -- but missing the depth found in some of the older bottlings. (Bottled for Texas)
      		
 
			
 
Medium-bodied but viscous in texture. Clearly aged in a bourbon cask-there's plenty of honeyed malt and vanilla throughout. Hints of bourbon even peek through occasionally, along with some subtle peat. Soft melon mid-palate yields to dried spice, sea salt, bitter chocolate and herbal notes on the finish. Fairly dry for a 12 year old-particularly on the finish. Best served as an aperitif.
      		
 
			
 
This is the oldest expression of Inchmurrin to be released by Loch Lomond, who make it in their highly versatile distillery at
Alexandria. Brittle toffee and cod liver oil on the nose, with vanilla and a whiff of Jaffa oranges. Smooth and full on the palate, more substantial and sophisticated than the younger Inchmurrin variants. The fruits are now more citric. Lengthy and unctuous in the finish, with more citrus fruit, gentle spice, and a touch of oak. £90
      		
 
			
 
Jura Elixir is exclusive to the Sainsbury’s supermarket chain, and takes its name from the legend that the water of Jura possesses life-prolonging qualities. Elixir was finished in a mix of American white oak and ex-sherry casks.  The nose is mildly fungal, with caramel and sea salt. Treacle toffee, ginger, and citrus fruits on the palate, which is ultimately slightly acrid. The finish is medium in length and spicy, with licorice. £16 (350 ml)
      		
 
			
 
At first I wondered what was going on here. This Lagavulin has more of the austerity typical of Port Ellen. There’s a tense minerality on the nose giving the impression of salty rock-pools and samphire. Water makes it sweeter and oyster-like. There’s big delivery on the tongue, with masses of distillery character, but that tension remains to the saline finish. In a head-to-head with Caol Ila, the former wins hands down. £85	
      		
 
			
 
rather soft whisky, with gently sweet notes of vanilla, marshmallow, and macaroon, with underlying tropical fruit, cut grass, and subtle spearmint. A feminine whisky to have with dessert -- or as dessert.
      		
 
			
 
Grape candy, raisin, blueberries, vanilla malt, and lavender, with hints of lemon and spearmint. More aggressive campfire embers and damp earth burn underneath, along with some salt. A whisky that grows on you, and not bad for 7 years old.

      		
 
			
 
Succulent, sappy, with plenty of oak. This whisky is quite fruity, with tangerine, lemon, and strawberries. It is balanced by fat barley, almonds and damp oak. It is not as polished and rounded as the Gordon & Macphail Longmorn reviewed above. Indeed, the fruity, damp oak notes can be quite dominant in this whisky. However, the whisky evolves constantly on the palate and there are some minty, spicy underlying notes which add intrigue. Definitely save this one for after dinner. 

-> On page 224 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Appetizingly briny and spicy, as would be expected from a Pulteney-especially on the nose. The spice notes (cinnamon, licorice root, vanilla) are balanced with light caramel and toffee. Quite dry, polished leather finish with suggestions of bourbon. While still enjoyable, I feel this would have been a better whisky if it were bottled 5-10 years ago. 

      		
 
			
 
Strathisla whisky produced from peaty water, to create a different variant of Strathisla. The two dominant characteristics here are ripe fruit (berries, raisin, pineapple, citrus) and wood spices (cinnamon, clove, mint). The sherry cask and 33 years on oak have left their impact. The fruit and honeyed/toffee almond sweetness is to the fore with the dry spices kicking in later. They balance themselves out, but I wonder what this whisky tasted like fifteen years ago before the sherry and oak took the upper hand? 

      		
 
			
 
A special batch of Stranahan’s, aged in Hungarian oak. The distillery is doing a lot of experimenting with aging their whiskey in different wine barrels. I really like how this one turned out. Nicely sweet, with honey-drenched fruit, golden raisin, cotton candy, caramel apple, Jordon almonds, and grape skins. Good grip -- and a little funky -- on the finish (nothing too assertive, though) which cuts through the sweetness. Not a polished whiskey, but certainly an adventure! (Available only at the distillery.)
      		
 
			
 
This is the Mackmyra equivalent of an arena rock band playing a small town club gig; a raw, rough and ready, in your face rock and roll version of the whisky — and it’s not for the faint-hearted. Matured in French red wine casks, it has a pleasant apricot and woodsmoke nose, while the taste is young, brittle, and gristy, with intense and persistent pepper, ginger, and bitter berries. Well-made, but not the best starting point to explore Mackmyra. 
      		
 
			
 
This whisky is in between the "Original" Tullamore and Tullamore Dew 12 year old in age and price range, and it also fits between the two in flavor and quality.  I thought that maybe this whiskey would have a more distinctive character to it (sherry cask aging, different proof, etc.) compared to the other two, given that it is a limited edition of only 900 cases and so close in age to the others, but it doesn't.  It's not that this is a bad thing, but rather just 'more of the same.'
It certainly is a pleasant enough whiskey - well balanced, not aggressive, yet with enough maturity and pot still content to make it "sip worthy" if one chooses to do so.  Rather than buy the standard Tullamore Dew for mixing (or drinking on the rocks) and the 12 year old for sipping, you can reasonably cover your bases with just this one bottle of 10 year old.

Rating for Original Tullamore Dew: 80 (it has gotten better over the years); rating for Tullamore Dew 12 year old: 84.
      		
 
			
 
Aptly named after an inferno from an 18
 century hot air balloon tragedy. Kaboom! The alcohol singes the nasal cavities, baying for you to succumb, but there is underlying maltiness, tight currants, leather bootlaces, allspice, cherry, stewed apples, and damp warehouses. To taste: fire in the hole! At full power, it strafes the taste buds into submission, leaving them numb and cowering for the abatement of the peppery, dry finish. Brawn vanquishes subtlety. Douse liberally.
      		
 
			
 
A unique and quite intriguing whiskey. A “bottle ready” California pilsner beer was given an extra dose of hops, then distilled in a pot still and aged in new oak for six years. Then it was “aged” in stainless steel for another three years. Five barrels were bottled. When I traveled through Europe, some of the breweries let me taste “Hop Schnapps” they’d had a distiller produce from their own beer. It was always just for their own private consumption, not for sale. This Charbay release reminds me of that, only aged into a mature whiskey. It’s a complex whiskey, naturally accentuated by hops, exotic teas, marijuana (seriously!), candied fruit, lavender, dark berries, raspberry (red and black), juniper, freshly ground tellicherry pepper, and light Caribbean rum. A nice “change of pace” whiskey.

      		
 
			
 
Take the Charbay R5 Clear and add some vanilla and toast notes: interesting. The flavors…on first sip, the mellowing richness of the oak makes for a nice entry. But the wood blunts the zip of the hoppy beer wash without adding enough to compensate for the loss, and makes for a hotter finish. It’s still interesting, but the wood gets in the way of what this can be. 
      		
 
			
 
Aultmore is part of the Dewar’s stable and another of Speyside’s forgotten light brigade. Here is a noseful of esters: bubblegum, pineapple, pink grapefruit, strawberries, and icing sugar. Visions of “Legally Blonde” flash through the mind. The palate is equally energetic, though with little cask influence it’s a bit gawky and slightly green, especially with water, suggesting that another year wouldn’t have done it any harm. Still, all very lovely.  £100
      		
 
			
 
A trio of new expressions of what has become an established Islay brand. This one has a vibrant, edgy opening, almost like a burning lawnmower box, mixed with needed oiliness (gun oil), white tea, and, in time, the rather pleasant note of a cold fish supper. The palate is broad, and though light, the oils allow it to cling to the tongue as the salt, lime, and smoke all begin to build. A little hard, but pleasantly bracing.£44 
-> On page 225 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
It often takes time for a new distillery to find its feet, but Kilchoman’s spirit was top quality from the first day. Its limited-edition releases act as markers on a work in progress, but are precociously advanced for their tender years. This, the first 5 year old, leads with a note like wet rushes/wet dog (that’s good!) alongside lightly turfy smoke. The palate is sweet, smoked, and thick with allspice on the finish. A star is born.
      		
 
			
 
Diageo’s smallest distillery and another that has worm tubs. The character here is grassy: think hay and straw rather than lawn clippings. There’s just a hint of cereal behind, and a fresh, roasted spiciness. The palate has good central sweetness where you just get a hint of fruit. Light and fresh, and a good afternoon dram. £33
      		
 
			
 
A malt that was overlooked by one owner (Glenmorangie) and is now, under the auspices of a new one (La Martiniquaise), beginning to ease itself back into the single malt world. Its problem has been the price: too low (see Speyburn). The standard 12 year old bottling gives a perfect idea of its potential. This is as soft and sweet a malt as you could ask for: peaches, toffee, and baked apple, with a tobacco/cedar/pine note from the oak. 
      		
 
			
 
Thanks to the suicidal pricing policy of its previous owner, Glen Moray has been considered nothing more than a bargain basement malt, but at its best it is a very sweet, lightly malty dram. This is as soft as a lemon cream bun in a sunlit baker’s shop. Water brings out banana chews while the tongue brings to mind a picnic with baked scones and apricot jam. The only negative is slightly needling alcohol, so dilute and drink quickly. £72
      		
 
			
 
Released to celebrate the wedding of Prince William and Kate, it’s a combination of casks, with the standard unpeated and peated English whiskies mixed with malt matured in a mix of casks. The nose is nothing special, but the whisky is something else again. It’s initially bold, spicy, and assertive, but swim over the first waves and there’s a calmer, fruitier heart here. Another big step forward for an increasingly confident distillery. 
      		
 
			
 
The Norfolk-based English Whisky Company joins in the celebrations. It’s bright gold with a lovely sweetness to the nose, fresh peach, a little anise, some lily of the valley, and almond. There’s plenty happening on this light-to-medium base. The palate is clean, with hazelnut and layers of flavor where succulent fruits play off the sweet spices. This is a distillery that, as the Aussies say, is hitting its straps. For me, it’s their best release yet. £60
      		
 
			
 
Very clean, elegant, and well-rounded, with honey-kissed fruit, vanilla, and subtle spice. Very versatile. I would normally drink a whisky like this on the rocks or use it as a mixer. But, in a pinch, I could drink it neat.
      		
 
			
 
While its regular stablemate Fior contains a proportion of peated malt, Fasque is unpeated, and the best comparison is with the now-discontinued 12 year old ‘1824’ house bottling. The nose is fragrant, with sherry, cherries, and vanilla. Relatively full-bodied, with a rich, spicy palate, focusing on Jaffa oranges and dark chocolate. It dries quite quickly to black coffee and spicy licorice, which linger in the mouth, along with a note of toffee. £35
      		
 
			
 
Woodstone’s using a local brewer’s beer as the basis for this one. Intriguing nose: grainy, sweet, but also a bit green/herbaceous. That's quite tasty! The malt comes through broad and sweet, the herbal character floats over the top and perks up the taste buds, almost like a digestif. The finish is tinged with honey and herbs, but dries up nicely. Smooth for the proof, too.
      		
 
			
 
Sweet, crisp nose: apple, mint, wintergreen. Grainy in the mouth; sweet, bready flavors. The whiskey coats the mouth, but more in an obscuring way; it seems to get between you and the flavors. It is quite smooth compared to young bourbons, but it leaves me looking for more. Overall impression is of a sweeter, younger whiskey that needs to mature, and the clean character makes me think maturity would look good on it. 
-> On page 226 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Full-bodied and sweet on the nose, mixing burlap, bran, fruit cake, hazelnut purée, malt
extract; with water it becomes fresher and almond-like with a touch of
greengage plum. The palate has a soft feel, with the thickness displayed in the
nose alongside plums and crystallized ginger. It’s just a little flabby. I’d
like a bit more freshness or grip. The finish is nutty and rich. 
£51/1 liter
      		
 
			
 
Rye whiskey aged in casks used to age maple syrup. As penetrating an aroma as maple is, it’s very subtle here. The nose is rye whiskey—spicy, oily, bitter/minty—with just the barest hint of maple. The maple peeps up mid-palate for a sweet turn and lingers into the finish. I need to be convinced of the attraction; the maple and rye jar a bit when jammed together. And the price—$82 for 750 ml—seems crazy. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Armorik has been making whisky for more than twelve years; it's growing in confidence, and the quality is improving. There's peat in the malt here, and it gives the whisky a feisty and earthy quality. The spirit is matured first in Armorik oak barrels and then transferred to sherry. Sherry and peat is a tough trick to pull off and this just about gets away with it, with coastal brine and lemon rubbing up against wood smoke, barley, and honey. €38 
      		
 
			
 
If you're looking for a radically different tasting malt whisky to anything else you know, start here. This is all Christmas church incense, burnt treacle toffee, charcoal, and overdone barbecued meat. Weird? Multiply by five and you're getting there. But I took this to a two-day music festival for 25-35 year olds, and of the 20 world whiskies on show, this was one of the most requested. €62
      		
 
			
 
The first spirit distilled at Abhainn Dearg is now 3 years old and legally Scotch single malt whisky. The distillery has celebrated with a single cask, non-colored, non-chill filtered release of 2,011 500 ml bottles. Apricots, crystallized ginger, candied peel, and papier-mâché on the nose. The palate features fresh fruit, spicy oak, honeycomb, and finally, toffee. Quite short in the finish, with more toffee, and a nutty note. £150
      		
 
			
 
Pink cotton candy and hot caramel sauce on a simple nose turn to rich burnt toffee and invigorating hot chili pepper on the palate, followed by savory herbs. The herbal tones quickly turn pleasantly bitter before fading into the barest suggestion of dry oak. Tingling peppery heat lingers right to the end. A hot, spicy version of Wiser’s Deluxe with the rye elements boosted by added vanilla. (Canada only) C$28
      		
 
			
 
Burnt caramel, sweet—almost candied—but not cloying, the whisky quickly develops fiery blasts of pepper that linger long on the sides of your tongue. As the heat builds, caramel melts into barley sugar, which in turn fades into bitter citrus pith. Flinty hard rye and vague barrel tones never let us forget that this is whisky: whisky enhanced with vanilla and spices that a probing palate might have found anyway in the unflavored dram.
      		
 
			
 
An Irish blend matured in used bourbon barrels and finished in Concannon Petite Sirah wine barrels. Very clean and fresh, with mouth-coating honeyed malt, vanilla, tropical fruit, and golden raisin. Fleeting, light oak finish. My only issue with this whiskey is that it tastes young. I would like to see another four to five years of aging (in bourbon casks, not Sirah) for this whiskey to really develop. (Available only in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
Ichiro Akuto, whose family previously owned the now demolished Hanyu distillery, and have five centuries of experience in sake production, opened his boutique distillery outside the town of Chichibu just over three years ago. This is the first official release of whisky (rather than new make) and it’s delicious. Lightly scented with touches of lemongrass, fennel pollen, sweet pear, and cookie dough, it has lovely balance and weight. Water allows it to spread over the tongue. One to watch. £90
      		
 
			
 
Another work in progress from the ever-enterprising Ichiro Akuto. This is made from barley that was malted by him and his team in Norfolk. Unusually for a Japanese malt, the aroma is, yes, malty, but it is more chaff-like than nutty. Chichibu’s floral element is there alongside grape must, verjus, and herbs. The palate is a fascinating mix of the very sweet with balancing dry and sour notes. A distillery that’s growing up fast. £90
-> On page 227 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Wow, that's a small barrel whiskey! Only 2 years old, and more like 12 years dark, with a nose stuffed full of oak char, steamy mint, and hot vanilla. You know it's wheat in the mouth; despite the aggressive nose and the heat you do get, this is still pretty friendly stuff for 50%: sweet dough, mint, and more oak. But the finish roars in real hot and a bit astringent, ruining the moment, and water doesn't help.
      		
 
			
 
A hot wash of vanilla and sweet cloves and cinnamon, with shouty alcohol heat and a log of oak; whatever else this is, ‘subtle’ is not on the menu. Wow, is that hot in the mouth! Still, it’s flavorful with it; cinnamon candy and corn on the cob gush onto the palate. There are some cobby notes though, and a bit of mustiness. The finish is—surprise!—hot, and fades reluctantly. Doc Bryson prescribes more time in a large barrel.  
      		
 
			
 
Aged 6 to 7 months in quarter barrels. Sharpish, oaky nose with a sweet grain/golden syrup backing. Spirity in the mouth, with a big slap of young oak up front that quickly subsides, yielding sweet corn muffin, white pepper, and dry cocoa that linger into the finish. Hot, but worth the burn. Some nice components here; age and a bigger barrel could do a better job on integration.
      		
 
			
 
A sweet mélange of bourbon, honey, ladyfingers, and praline in the nose, with a faint thread of heavy tree blossoms. Quite sweet, but not syrupy, and the aromas — minus the blossoms — are here, plus vanilla. Some stickiness on the finish, but it’s not unpleasant, more like candy, which is what this experience is like: booze candy. That candy simplicity is confusing: there are a lot of flavors here, but at a candy level. A bit less sweetness would be welcome.
      		
 
			
 
Scooped-out spaghetti squash, whole red bird’s eye chilies, celery tops, and country ham. It is redolent of sugary-sweet candies like Spangles (from the 1970s). Light and delicate initially, moving into phases of vanilla sponge, dried raspberry, and peppery spices, then the vegetal notes grow larger in the later phases. An enjoyable effort from refill cask #10439, but it fizzles out, leaving a finish of light pepperiness, heat, and sodden newspapers. £88
      		
 
			
 
A nose like light caramel corn, with a hint of biscuit dryness and a smidgen of cinnamon sugar. Light in the mouth, sweet and a bit spicy, with some cinnamon heat toward the end. There is a bit of a roar right in the middle, where the grainy sweetness catches fire briefly, but mostly this is fairly meek stuff. Made for mixing, no real flaws.
      		
 
			
 
A blend of aged (sourced) bourbon and Great Lakes’ own (young) malt whiskey. Quite sweet on the nose; a rich, herbal sweetness with a strong, youthful quality to it. Interestingly medicinal on the tongue as the herbal character swells. A full mouthfeel, with clear references to new make about it: a bit oily, grassy, and bright. The finish is the best part: minty and a bit drying, a pleasant farewell. Interesting concept. 
      		
 
			
 
Quite mild on the nose for 99 proof: dry oak, light honey, crisp corn. It all fires up in the mouth, a thick wash of hot oak and corn—attic whiskey—white pepper, and a tongue-crinkling woodiness leading to a drying finish that leaves you thirsty and swallowing as it fades. This may only be 6 years old (according to the label) but they were hot years. Better with a bit of water. (sourced whiskey) 
      		
 
			
 
The Doublewood experiment highlighted above may be the way forward for what's left of this old New Zealand stock, because having tasted several samples now, and presumably the better ones, there's a pattern emerging. The core whisky is fine, with tangy lemon and earthy pepper, but the casks clearly weren't great and they throw up inconsistencies. This is fine as far as it goes—until you see the price tag. This is $120 in American dollars. Nor is it as good as the Rugby World Cup 16 year old Vindication bottling.  NZ$148
      		
 
			
 
No doubts from the color what type of cask this is: first-fill, sherry. The nose shows masses of bitter chocolate, fresh coffee grounds, black cherry, and molasses cut with humid aromas of damp earth, nut, and dried fruit. This bittersweet theme continues on the tongue, but its sweetness surprises, with the spirit pushing the tannins away just enough to reveal itself. If you like savory power, this is for you. For me, while it’s instructive, it’s too grippy.  £70
-> On page 228 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Continuing progress on Jack Daniel’s rye whiskey; this one is 2 years old and labeled “straight.” Pale amber. New make sharpness, sawn oak, hard candy, and a flip of cinnamon bark: driven, simple, insistent nose. Thin on the palate: sweet, with an oily overlay of bitter grass and grainy flatness. A dry, contracting finish. Not flawed, but not particularly pleasant, either. Someone tell Jack; craft distillers get $50 for young rye because they’re small. JD should be half that.
      		
 
			
 
Gold color. Youthful, exotic fruit and spice aromas-unlike any whisky I’ve sampled. Light to medium-bodied. Its flavors are like its aromas-you just wouldn’t expect this many types of exotic fruit and spice notes dominating its flavor profile (could it be too much of a good thing?). A honeyed malty sweetness serves as a backdrop. Again, like its aroma, it is youthful in flavor.
Style: Single malt American whiskey. Price: mid $40s. Limited availability.
There are two ways to look at this single malt. As a whiskey, it shows great potential but still needs more time to realize this potential. But in many respects it tastes more like some exotic liqueur. From this perspective, it seems more comfortable with its youth. Personally, I would like to see it with a few more years in the wood. Regardless, it's certainly worth a try. But don't buy an entire bottle until you do.
      		
 
			
 
Creamy butterscotch soothes the blazing hot spices of this archetypal Canadian mixing whisky. Fresh kiwi fruit and lime fragrances add dimension to a sweet, glowing middle, then fade on a long toffeeish finish that finally slips into slight hints of bitter grapefruit pith. A sweet, simple, and fruity session whisky that you could sip neat all evening, or over ice at a sunny poolside. A mixer, yes, and a sipper too. 
C$26
      		
 
			
 
“At last!” they cry. Anchor Distilling is bringing in whiskies from Nikka. I taunted you with the first of the initial brace in 2010, the exemplary Yoichi 15 year old (a hefty 95 points). The second is the firm’s vatted malt, Taketsuru 12 year old. A mix of Yoichi and Miyagikyo distillates, it is the latter which is to the fore here: a honey-laden mix of cut flowers, persimmon, vanilla, and apple. More are on their way.  
      		
 
			
 
Sweet and a bit funky; maybe a wisp of smoke, maybe some green cornstalk, and some mint/vanilla. Rippling and vibrant in the mouth, hot and bold, and not candy-sweet at all, more like fuel-injected cornbread with a splash of burning mint eau de vie across the top. Or maybe that’s just the AC/DC talking; maybe I should review to Mozart. Not bad, but I think I like the simpler unaged version.
      		
 
			
 
Typical rye spices bathe in rich, smooth caramels and burnt sugar, with a gingery cayenne burn. Real black pepper engulfs cloves and cinnamon in a fiery and vibrant display, while vague tones of milk chocolate gently cool things down. Then an oiliness and mouth-filling richness sweep over a tinge of bitter herbal elixir and, yes, sawdust. This classic high-rye whisky from Alberta Distillers brings suggestions of dark fruit to an underlying nuttiness. 
      		
 
			
 
Ichiro loves Japanese oak (mizunara) and here’s a finished example. You need water, however, to be able to discern those characteristic incense notes. Without it, you’re in a world of vanilla and resin. The neat palate is hot but firm, with some red fruits and an allspice note. Water is needed, and does allow a fresh acidity to come through on the finish; sadly it also adds tannic bitterness. A tricky balancing act. ¥9,000
      		
 
			
 
From the perfumed nose to the sweet and short finish, this blend doesn’t really put a foot wrong, but it’s shy and unadventurous.
Clearly well made, well balanced, and quite acceptable, it has a perfumed black currant sherbet nose, some slight but enjoyable blueberry, grape, and prune notes and a soft sweet conclusion. On its own, all fine: but it gets lost when in company.
      		
 
			
 
Aromas of liquid honey, light toffee, dried apple, and satsuma peel. There is an initial citric attack, but when the flare dies down, a residual bitterness cuts through the underlying creaminess and caramel. Sure, its component whiskies lack substance and grip, but there is some flavor progression through to an enjoyable piquancy around the gums. The finish is a nippy buzz of peel and heather honey. Simple, uncomplicated, but for the price there’s plenty to like here.
      		
 
			
 
Oak, and some candy-like sweetness, and alcohol heat…and not much else. A shy nose for a bourbon. Very hot in the mouth,
somewhat two-dimensional corn and oak, just put together without anything else around them. A pretty simple whiskey, with a slightly cloying finish. Nothing really flawed, just nothing really standing out, either. Sourced whiskey.
-> On page 229 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
All local Colorado malt, with a little peat-smoked malt. Unaged. No smoke on the nose; fresh, a bit feinty, wet and juicy melon, a hint of cardamom. Smoke is there as it hits the tongue, immediate but gentle. Spirit tastes much cleaner than it smells. Hot on the tongue, prickly. More melon and spice on the finish, a bit creamy. Not a bad white, but quite pricey. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Bonded Stock was a Gooderham and Worts brand until Harry Hatch moved production to Windsor during Prohibition. Dry grain with hints of bicycle tires on the nose become barley sugar and fiery pepper on the palate. Simple with a delicate balance of hot ginger, licorice root, spearmint, savory herbs, watery caramel, and mild ripe fruit, ending with a refreshing bitter tinge. Old-time hard-rye mixing whisky, but go ahead, sneak a wee sip
      		
 
			
 
For years, about half a dozen large oak barrels of malt spirit sat ignored against the wall of the shop at Okanagan distillery in Vernon, BC. Fruit spirit is their main product. Finally, those barrels have been disgorged and blended into a fruit-forward single malt that tilts and dips like a butterfly in flight. Ripe cherries and dried apricots flit through Kraft caramels and green apple Twizzlers into a long, glowing sunset of hot spices and floral breezes. C$70
      		
 
			
 
Douglas Laing follows up its award winning, Islay-soaked Big Peat with this, a sherried Speyside whisky. Just as Big Peat looks like Captain Haddock from Tintin, Scallywag on the label is a dead ringer for Snowy, though the official story is different. Anyway, this whisky isn't a patch on the Islay monster. Rootsy green salad malt is only partially rescued by the trademark Christmas cake and stewed fruits. Likeable, but not a classic. £45
      		
 
			
 
Very fresh and quite light in color, suggestive of only light cask conversation. BenRiach’s fruits are there with hints of apricot, even some gooseberry. Very light malty background, and then a whiff of witch hazel. In time, it sweetens into banana and pineapple. The palate is clean, though pretty hot, with that mature BenRiach fizzy spiciness on the back palate. Can’t help but feel that this would have been a great 30 year old. £95
      		
 
			
 
Not often seen as a single bottling, here we have Speyside’s modernist distillery in typically delicate guise, with plenty of subtle florals (think hyacinth and daffodils), something which is amplified with water. Imagine a cool day in early spring and you are pretty much there. The mouth is clean and fresh, with a little acidity. Water doesn’t damage the palate delivery, but neither does it particularly enhance things. A sorbet rather than a meal. £65
      		
 
			
 
The most intense of the Orphan Barrel initial release.  Very robust, with leather, tobacco, and roasted nuts. Quite spicy and resinous too. Toffee, maple syrup, and caramel struggle to soothe all this robustness, but the oak maintains the upper hand.  A 
, perhaps, after a large meal? Unless you are purchasing for a piece of bourbon history, my advice would be to try it before you buy because, while complex, it is also quite woody.
      		
 
			
 
Simple nose of corn, oak, cinnamon candy, and ash. Candy sweet, grainy, still simple, and a bit thin; increasingly hot at the end. Needs more breadth and depth, but there’s nothing seriously flawed. I’d characterize this as a good flyweight boxer caught in a cruiserweight bout; nice footwork, solid performance, and dealing some good hits, but the bigger, older bourbons give it a palate-pounding. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
This 3 year old whisky comes from Denmark’s smallest distillery, where Jens-Erik Jørgensen has invested in a bulbous pot still from Forsyths, Scotland. I found barley sugar, mashing malt, risen loaves, vanilla, and fruity esters reminiscent of boiled sweets. The warming flavors begin with orange candies and clove, but it bucks like a wild stallion before settling to divulge a hint of licorice and cayenne pepper. A dry and sudden finish. Promising, but needs time to mellow. €200
      		
 
			
 
A Seven Stills and Pacific Brewing Laboratory collaboration: a distilled double IPA. Broiled grapefruit and caramel, with a razory lightness, but a bit muddled. Flavors of sweet malt and maple pierced in a needle-row with bitter hop resins, pine, pith; malt/hop/malt/hop comes in quick waves. Like some double IPAs, this is a blunt instrument that simply walks up and wallops you with hops and malt; neither subtle nor particularly complex. Hop fans may well love it; others will not. Price is per 375 ml.
-> On page 230 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
At 8 years old, there are stiff caramels, malt, oatcakes, Genoise sponge, and zested clementines on the nose. It doesn’t stint on flavor when it comes to the taste, bringing dried fig rolls, chewy toffee, Aunt Sally pralines, walnuts, and chocolate ganache to the party. It’s driven by dry fruit rather than sweetness, and there is a bitter edge to the swallow that persists into the finish. £35
      		
 
			
 
Very sweet and simple aroma, like plain jelly beans, with only a whisper of the heat you’d expect at 45%. Better on the tongue; proper heat, some cornpone, a bed of oak. Smooth, good balance, good finish. Nothing stands out, but nicely made. Loses points on the nose, and typifies the Small Producer Dilemma: why bottle a good bourbon? Beam and Heaven Hill do that already, cheaper than you ever will. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Nose is a bit perfumed, like doilies at grandma's house, with grain, grass, and meadow notes. Flavor is minty, rye-bitter, and penetrating; finish is sweet and hot, with more grassiness. Powerful rye influence; not much corn, and that perfume note is odd, but the rye is gripping.
      		
 
			
 
Unusually sweet and perfumed. Layers of malty sweetness (honey, butterscotch, caramel, vanilla wafers) is the dominant feature of this whisky, with background notes of almonds, toasted oak, and citrus fruit. Herbal, hay notes also emerge from time to time. This is not an overly complex whisky. It is also a tad fiery at times (alluding to its youthful age), but this whisky is an improvement over a previous sample I tasted from this distillery a year or two ago. 

      		
 
			
 
A balanced and well-rounded whiskey, but it tastes a little youthful and spirity on the finish, and lacks the depth I’m looking for to score it higher in the 80s. Notes of maple syrup, crème caramel, and raspberry tart, with cinnamon, vanilla, mint, and dried citrus peppered throughout. I like it, but there are better bourbons at this price.

      		
 
			
 
This is from the stock of aged Willowbank whisky that  was marketed under the Milford label before ending up as whisky from Thomson. You following this? It’s sweet, with an attractive soft melon center, but sharp pepper kicks in and coats the mouth, staying forever. 
      		
 
			
 
Very pale gold color. Aggressive notes of tar, boat docks, seaweed, and smoke are tamed by a mouth-coating honeyed vanilla sweetness. Very long, smoky, salty finish. This is a youthful, powerful, relentless whisky that you will either like or loathe. 

      		
 
			
 
Identified on the label only as a single malt Speyside whisky, but does not disclose the distillery. A rounded, gently sweet whisky -- nothing too assertive here to offend anyone, and unpretentious -- with notes of vanilla, toasted coconut, caramel apple, honeydew melon, and ripe berries. Creamy finish.
      		
 
			
 
A blend of four different Islay malt whiskies. A pungent, merciless Islay whisky with intense peat reek, tarry rope, and raw seaweed. Fiery cinnamon, clove, evergreen, and unsweetened black licorice stick just adds fuel to the fire. An underbelly of vanilla malt and suggestions of coconut cream try to douse the fire, but it's a losing battle. Long, seemingly endless burning ember finish.
      		
 
			
 
Aged in fast-growth wood. Quite the antithesis of the “Fine Grain Oak” release above; the comparison is interesting. Darker fruit (plum, blackberry), and darker sugars (maple syrup, toffee). Resinous and becoming quickly dry on the palate, with leather, tobacco leaves, grape-stem tannins, barrel char, and dried spice. A heavier, more textural bourbon than the Fine Grain Oak expression. I like this whiskey a lot until the dry, leathery oak notes begin to dominate the latter half of the palate. That, my friend, is the coarse grain oak in action.
-> On page 231 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Youthful, simple, and uncomplicated. Buttered corn, soft vanilla, honey, and bright fruit, with a kiss of spice. Fairly quick finish.
      		
 
			
 
This one lacks the balance the other two have. It’s hotter on the palate (even with a liberal addition of water), and I feel the oak plays too large of a role. 

      		
 
			
 
XO refers to extra old, and this bourbon certainly is that. When compared to Kentucky Vintage, it’s drier, spicier, and more intense on the palate-even when its higher proof is diluted with water. Firm mint, resinous oak, leather, and even a waft of cigar smoke are the highlights of this bourbon. Long, dry, spicy finish and a bit fiery. For those who like a big, bold, oak-influenced bourbon. 

      		
 
			
 
Released to celebrate the Ardbeg space mission, this is a mix of 1990 Ardbeg from bourbon and Marsala casks, and it’s the latter which make the running from the start. Earthy, with blackberry and fruitcake, and sooty peatiness in the background. While there’s a medicinal/herbal note with water, the palate has a damp wood edge. Fortified wine can work with peat, but here there’s a clash between distillery character and the Marsala cask. Sadly, a disappointment.
      		
 
			
 
A distillery bottling of Ardmore finally comes to the U.S. This one is non-chill filtered and finished in a “Quarter Cask,” similar to Laphroaig Quarter Cask (same owners). Ardmore remains one of the few Speyside whiskies made with peat-smoked malt. Chewy, almost oily-textured, with sweet notes of toffee and caramel up front, followed by emerging damp, earthy peat and bourbon-like notes. The oaky, resinous bourbon lingers through the finish. The bourbon oak intensity dominates to a degree, disrupting the harmony of the remaining flavors. A whisky of great potential, but still waiting to achieve some of it.
      		
 
			
 
Reddish amber color. Aromas of honey drenched fruit, toffee, and fudge. Medium to heavy in body. Rich and sweet in flavor (toffee, fudge, caramel), with interwoven notes of rich, ripe fruit. Lingering toffee sweetness on the finish. 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Highland (Isle of Arran) single malt scotch Color: Straw Gold Aroma: Youthful. Pears in syrup, honeysuckle, and vanilla with a hint of caramel and citrus. Palate: Vibrant, somewhat youthful flavors that echo its aroma, finishing slightly sweet and a little fiery (because of its age).

   General Comments: The lack of chill-filtering certainly makes this whisky more flavorful and dynamic than its filtered brethren. It also tastes a little more mature. This shows how a whisky can be affected by chill-filtering. I expect this whisky to continue improving with additional aging. Price: low $40s. Available nationwide.
      		
 
			
 
An extremely atypical Auchentoshan. This whisky was aged in bourbon, oloroso sherry, and Pedro Ximinez sherry casks. The PX cask, in particular, transforms what is normally a soft, delicate whisky into a big, rich, and chewy whisky. Toffee, raisins, fudge, plum, and plenty of nutty notes are interwoven throughout. An interesting adventure, but it’s hard to find the Auchentoshan in there. 

      		
 
			
 
Light and clean, with citrus, tropical fruit (coconut, pineapple, ripe banana), white chocolate, and honeyed vanilla, resting on a clean malty foundation. Soft on the finish. An easy-going whisky.
      		
 
			
 
Rich and sweet, with toffee, coconut cream, Turkish delight, nougat, and honey. Ripe black raspberries, citrus, and dried spice (vanilla, fennel, and evergreen mint) provide complexity and attempt to balance all the sweetness. A pleasant dram, but I wish there was a little more to prop up all that sweetness. A whisky for those with a sweet tooth. Good with dessert, as dessert, or with a cigar. 

-> On page 232 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Perhaps the oldest BenRiach on the market. I have great respect for whisky that has somehow managed to survive this many years without being bottled. If you want to taste a piece of history (which I can understand) and have unlimited funds, then go ahead and buy this. But, for the money, I prefer the BenRiach 25 year old (or even the 30 year old) to this whisky. Deeply layered oak -- from dried, spicy oak to juicy, damp oak. Notes of perfumed vanilla, roasted chestnut, and orange marmalade accentuate the oak. Pretty good for 40, but its best years are behind it.
      		
 
			
 
Clean, fresh and uncomplicated. Honeyed malt, peaches and cream, with subtle floral and lime notes. Dry, herbal, oaky finish with a hint of bitter chocolate. A warm-weather whisky, or as an aperitif. 

      		
 
			
 
Not satisfied with trying different levels of peating and cask types, the folks at BenRiach are also utilizing triple distillation. This expression has spent three years in oloroso sherry butts, although for me there’s more a mix of honey and cream, and light orchard fruits than any overt fruitcake. The palate is clean and fresh and lifted. Good energy. £50 
      		
 
			
 
Or ‘Fumabat Porticus’ as it should be called—smoky whisky in a port cask—not that you need to be told that when you see the color. The port takes the upper hand on the nose, giving a layer of black raspberry, sloe, and cranberry sauce. The smoke hangs in the background. This juicy fruitiness carries through to the tongue where the smoke now adds much-required dry balance. The higher alcohol also stops it becoming too jammy. £59
      		
 
			
 
As cask strength examples of young Bowmore — sold at a very keen price — the small-batch Tempest range is already picking up a cult following. This third release does not disappoint in the smoke department, while the nose also shows some orange zest aromas. That said, it is a little restrained, showing its youth with a pea pod-like character on the palate, while its fruits are emerging but aren’t fully ripened. More of a strong breeze than a tempest. £50
      		
 
			
 
Though the color suggests good cask activity, the initial approach shows a dram that seems slightly unfocused and youthful. There are some kernel-like cereal elements and very little smokiness, with touches of salt and oil. The feeling is that it’s only starting to blossom — and there is a floral element — and has been bottled too early. It’s all very focused, lifted, and aromatic, but when compared to the Adelphi you can’t help but wonder whether the same distillery is involved.   £55 (500 ml)
      		
 
			
 
Comus is the name of a frankly terrifying English folk group who taps into the dark, pagan spirit underpinning that music. An apposite name then for the Laddie’s most heavily-peated variant. If you want to know what it’s like to stand beside a kiln, then sniff this, but the distillery’s sweetness is retained, here in the guise of pineapple and banana. The palate is like eucalyptus lozenges, with light maltiness before that Laddie thickness makes things even sweeter.
      		
 
			
 
Light gold in color, the roasted almond notes that start the nose show the influence of the amontillado sherry finish before your nose is filled with the contents of a spice merchant’s chest alongside, unusually, a light maritime note. Very gentle and clean in the mouth with sour plum and a generally amenable nature. More like this please, Burn Stewart! £60
      		
 
			
 
Stiùireadair means “helmsman” in Gaelic. This has been finished for a year in Marsala casks. The nose is all garden compost, moist vegetation, light smoke, and highly oxidized: like a young 
 (or indeed Marsala). Very nutty, with an almost vermouth-like quality. The palate is all clove, anise, cherry stone. Those oxidized wine notes are so dominant it’s shifted the balance toward the finish. This particular helmsman’s somewhat off course. £95
      		
 
			
 
Originally a one-off bottling for Friends of the Classic Malts, ‘Moch’ (Gaelic for dawn, though the association between daybreak and the dram is beyond me — one for the morning ‘skailk’ maybe?) appears to have taken the place of the Cask Strength expression. It shows a saline, seashell-like freshness, light smoke. and a pleasant mix of salami and grassiness. The palate is clean and intense with a continuation of that oyster liquor character. Great in a smoky Highball. £36
-> On page 233 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
The finish in question here is Muscatel casks and you can tell that from the start, as the nose is filled with a rich, sweet, and very pronounced dusky fruitiness — sloes and plums. The smoke as a result is diminished as are the grassy/bacony notes. While the smoke does emerge from its fruity bubble on the tongue, the effect is almost liqueur-like. It’s a very pleasing dram, but the question is, is it Caol Ila?
      		
 
			
 
Quite hot on the nose, with a little oak on show here alongside garam masala. The effect is of dried fish and seaweed, Brazil nut and bread basket. It needs water. In the mouth it’s tense when neat, giving you the sense of it straining to express itself fully but being constricted by alcohol. Firm and bold, but even with water it’s a little too dry.
      		
 
			
 
This Speyside distillery was closed in 1983. Very pale in color, mouth-coating, but not heavy or cloying. A clean whisky that emphasizes its sweeter notes, with honeyed malt, ripe barley, butterscotch, and vanilla. Subtle notes of cinnamon, lemon grass, and fruit in syrup. A dried, oak-spice finish provides balance. 

      		
 
			
 
Very fragrant and perfumed on the nose. Chewy and syrupy on the palate, with layers of sweetness (toffee, caramel, fudge), roasted almonds, and raisins. A drying, resinous spice finish saves the sweetness from being too dominant. Call me sentimental, but I just remembered the old Campbell Distillers 10 year old bottling which expressed so much more finesse, and was cleaner and not as heavy and cluttered. 

      		
 
			
 
This Glencraig, along with Mosstowie (reviewed below), were experimentations with "Lomond" stills, where the top of the stills were replaced with a rectifying column, allowing several different styles of whiskies to be produced at the same distillery. The Lomond stills were eventually removed. This is a very creamy malt, with an oily texture. Notes of bananas and cream, ripe barley, caramel, graham cracker, and orange creamsicle. Dry, spicy finish. The fruity zing in this whisky shows that it still has some life in it. A dessert whisky indeed. 

      		
 
			
 
One of a trio from Chivas Bros., who every year release limited editions of 500 ml cask strength bottlings from a selection of its estates. These are predominantly only for sale on site or by mail order through www.maltwhiskydistilleries.com.

This distillery is located amongst the fertile barley-growing fields of the Laich O’Moray. Though modern in look, it actually dates back to 1810. This is a classic introduction to its fresh, zesty style, which plays an important role in the Ballantine’s blends. Think cut grass, green apple, pine, pear drops, and a whiff of freshly-starched linen. This energy carries on to the mouth where apple is the dominant flavor, along with green walnut and a zippy acidity. £34 
      		
 
			
 
Fresh citrus notes and pear drops on the nose, plus a newly-opened packet of printer paper. The palate is quite full-bodied and fruity, with some white pepper. More citrus on the palate, with spicy, freshly-sawn wood. The finish is relatively long and fruity. Uncomplicated, but a good introduction to the brand. £30
      		
 
			
 
This isn’t the easiest to fall for. It’s stewed, swampy, a big, feisty, take-no-prisoners whisky with oxtail soup, spicy tomato and meat broth on the nose, then black treacle, praline, cayenne, and paprika. A rootsy prune juice is part of the finish. Challenging and tough. £67 [Dominic Roskrow]
      		
 
			
 
Another whisky that will not disappoint fans of the brand, but it doesn’t do enough to bring any converts on board. The nose is fresh and sweet, with barley and ginger and not much else. The taste is perfectly acceptable, and at this strength better than the standard bottling. Water brings out a sweet malt and barley core, some gentle spice, and a rich sweetness. 
      		
 
			
 
Think of sponge fingers soaked in cream and you’re not far off the initial aroma. Add in light macadamia-like nuttiness, a drift of mint, and Glenlivet’s signature apple — core, not green. As it opens, it becomes woodier, like a brush pile. The palate has sweet, pure, pear-like fruit that initially keeps the oak in balance. It seems to need water, but when it’s added the oak takes over. Good, but a little tired. £102
-> On page 234 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
A single cask bottling of The Glenrothes aged in a first-fill sherry cask. Only 519 bottles, all destined for the U.S. It is the richest, chewiest, sweetest, and fruitiest of all the Glenrothes whiskies reviewed here. Deep mahogany color, with notes of toffee apples, waxed fruit, burnt orange, prunes in syrup, and dark chocolate. The intensity of the sherry and length of oak-aging gives the whisky a flavor profile that begins to transcend traditional whisky flavors, expressing notes of port wine, pot-still rum, and rancio. 

      		
 
			
 
Sweet, ripe barley, balanced by damp peat, tar, and burning embers. Some spice notes (pepper, anise) linger on the finish. While enjoyable now, some of the flavors seem to behave more like individual solos, rather than harmony. I think they will begin to integrate nicely by the time this generation of Ledaig reaches its teens. 

      		
 
			
 
Caramelized, fruity notes of mandarin, pineapple, golden raisin, and plum. Heathery honey notes add an additional sweet dimension, as do some light toffee and nougat. A dusting of cocoa powder emerges occasionally. Like the other 15 year olds, this one is quite sherried, thick, and heavy on the palate. (Bottled for Hi-Time Wine Cellars) 

      		
 
			
 
A whisky very typical of this distillery, which has been silent since 1998. Rich and thick on the nose and palate; oozing vanilla, ripe malt, cotton candy, powdered sugar, new-mown hay, and lemon tart. Cinnamon, evergreen, and a wisp of smoke round out the palate. An evolving whisky -- starts out heavy and sweet, then turns clingingly dry. A fun, rare whisky for a reasonable price.
      		
 
			
 
Thick and syrupy on the palate. Notes of marshmallow, creamy vanilla, caramel, honey drenched fruit, almond liqueur, and coconut macaroon. Liquid dessert. 

      		
 
			
 
Despite close proximity to Islay, stylistically Jura make has far more in common with its Highland cousins. The entry level 10 year old variant offers resin, oil, cereal, and pine notes on the delicate nose. Comparatively light bodied, with malt and drying saltiness in the mouth, along with a hint of aniseed. The finish is malty and nutty, with more salt, plus just a wisp of smoke.
      		
 
			
 
A mix of bourbon and quarter casks finished in Pedro Ximenez, this new release is, initially, only for Travel Retail. The problem with finishing peaty whiskies is that all you can do is reduce the smoke, but here it’s done with as much subtlety as you can when dealing with PX. Think treacle scones, raisins, and tarry tobacco. A thick mid-palate gives an effect like an old-fashioned medicine. A sweet-hearted dragon smoldering in its seashore cave. (Travel Retail exclusive) £60 
      		
 
			
 
Sweet, ripe barley, balanced by damp peat, tar, and burning embers. Some spice notes (pepper, anise) linger on the finish. While enjoyable now, some of the flavors seem to behave more like individual solos, rather than harmony. I think they will begin to integrate nicely by the time this generation of Ledaig reaches its teens. 

      		
 
			
 
Style: Speyside single malt scotch Color: Gold Aroma: Fresh and youthful. Citrus fruit, honey, vanilla, ginger, and a hint of smoke. Palate: Youthful and on the light side for a Macallan. Notes of citrus, ginger root, honey and smoke. The whisky finishes rather quicky. 

      		
 
			
 
There’s a Roman dish involving lamb cooked in milk, and this is it in alcohol form. A slightly peculiar lactic note rises and falls above the rich meatiness of the spirit. There’s a hit of pencil shavings, but with water it becomes cheesy. So much more straightforward on the tongue with good vinous weight, like an old Vin Jaune. It finishes with earthy tones. It’s just…odd. £125
-> On page 235 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Very pale in color. A creamy, mouthcoating whisky, with thick vanilla as the main thread. Quite dry, given its creaminess. I’m also picking up a lot of gin botanicals (especially juniper and orange peel). An interesting enough of a dram, but not something I would drink on a regular basis. 

      		
 
			
 
A very traditional Rosebank-aged in a refill hogshead and bottled fairly young (12 years old). Rosebank is one of the better, yet lesser known Lowland single malts. Since the distillery was closed down in 1993, it will continue being unfamiliar to most, and finding young Rosebanks like this one will become increasingly more difficult. Here’s one at cask strength. The whisky turns very cloudy with the addition of water due to lack of chill filtering, but the additional water brings out the whisky’s subtle aromas and flavors-fresh cut grass, hay, delicate fruit, and a gentle malty sweetness. Ironically, I actually enjoyed some of the recent young G&M Rosebanks bottled at 40% ABV better than this one-their flavors were cleaner, brighter, and more refined. Still, this is a fair representation of the Lowland style. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in a re-charred sherry butt. Sweet, but not cloying, with plenty of fruit throughout. Toffee, vanilla fudge, roasted chestnuts, and nougat, enhanced by glazed peaches, burnt pineapple, dark cherry pits, and subtle anise. Gripping charred oak tannins emerge mid-palate and continue on the finish detracting from an otherwise very pleasant experience. (Bottled exclusively for Binny’s Beverage Depot)

      		
 
			
 
Douglas Laing has added a no age statement bottling of Talisker to its Provenance range, tagging it as “Young and Feisty.” It comprises whisky from casks #10227 and 10229. Lively and up front, with bubblegum, wood smoke, and black pepper on the nose. Developing ozone. Zesty soft fruits, emerging dark peat notes, and more pepper on the palate. The finish is quite short, nutty, and slightly metallic. Young and feisty indeed! £65
      		
 
			
 
Pleasantly sweet. Good malt foundation with an abundance of bright summer fruit. Clean, straight-forward and uncomplicated.

      		
 
			
 
Light amber. The nose offers up walnut bread, spelt flour, and a green, malty note. Overall, it’s slightly unyielding, with toasted oak, hazelnut, and barley. Water opens up a sweeter core: Lucozade, apricot kernel, and barley. The palate is where the apricot flesh turns up, but then it firms up quickly, snuffing that moment of levity out. Water introduces lemon before it becomes very gingery on the finish. It’s the thing about Tormore; it just can’t let itself go. 
€42
      		
 
			
 
Barely aged white whiskey. Huge new-make nose, soaked grain and green apple, then rye-driven mint and spice. Bursting spice and mint in the mouth, quick hot fireworks, long gripping finish; somewhat drying. Hot, but holds your attention. Lower distillation proof (134) leaves more room for flavor on this one, and some water makes it enjoyable...if I could just get past that new-make nose I can't help thinking of as “too young.”
      		
 
			
 
Moment is a series of special one-off single malt whisky releases, and allows the distillery to experiment with cask types. Some of the whiskies, such as this one, take the distillery back to an earlier, more intense and difficult era. So here we have mushroomy, earthy whisky with damp autumn leaves, artichoke, tobacco, and salted fish in the mix. It's a full-on savory experience, and not one for the faint-hearted. SEK 1295
      		
 
			
 
There's absolutely nothing wrong with this and out of context, its rounded, fruity, and sweet taste is perfectly acceptable. But it's standing in the company of giants, and when compared to the steady stream of world-class Irish whiskeys over the last year, this just doesn't cut it. The 12 years in oak don't seem to have added much to the story, the alcoholic strength means it lacks real bite, and the flavors are bland in this company. 
      		
 
			
 
Remarkably light and drinkable for an all-malt product. Malty foundation with citrus (lemon zest, tangerine sherbet) shining through, along with vanilla wafer, white chocolate, coconut, ginger, and cut grass. A worthy “bridge whisky” for blended whisky drinkers curious about malt whisky, but single malt whisky drinkers might want more individuality. A whisky for a warm, lazy afternoon.

-> On page 236 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
A slightly perfumed nose offers up the slightly unusual pairing of dried lavender, sweet-cured herring, and then potpourri air freshener. This flies off to show wet dulse on warm sand. It starts sweetly with some nutmeg, then hot peppers. The smoke is very light, allowing a tantalizing glimpse of soft guava before the salinity returns. Water brings out the peat kiln but also that initial perfume. Muddled. £700
      		
 
			
 
Quite a solid start for a Caol Ila which, like the 30 year old 
, pitches you into the farmyard, though this time it’s a sheep-shearing shed. There’s also some bacon and spent barbecue. The initial impression is of a pretty dry example, but some oil begins to seep through. The palate is explosive with some engine oil, becoming pretty flinty with violet notes, and the distillery sweetness is hidden. A little disjointed. £135
      		
 
			
 
The least assertive of the Wemyss 12 year old range, and the most flighty. There's nothing wrong here, and the whisky's well-made and won't disappoint, but when you compare the spice hit here with what's on offer with other malts, this isn't shouting loudly enough. £35
      		
 
			
 
Pale, almost peach color. Light aromas of caramel, sweet citrus. Tastes of sweet caramel, faint bite of oak on the end. Simple, but clean and pleasant. You’d have to be careful mixing this — it would get lost easily — but it should be nice on the rocks or with seltzer.  
      		
 
			
 
A mouth-coating whisky, and oily in texture. Ripe vanilla malt, peaches & cream, polished oak, roasted nuts, and a hint of coconut cream pie. Soothing, creamy finish. A pleasant “anytime” dram. Bottled at 46% to better display its fine textures and subtle nuances.
      		
 
			
 
The oldest of the new trio, here you can see how the smoke has become fully absorbed, accenting the peapod and spearmint, giving depth to the still-fresh ozonic elements. There are light levels of complexity, even a little chocolate. The tongue, when neat, goes deep into pear and apple, but it’s edgy. Adding water, however, shows the lack of oak integration. I’d want more from a whisky of this age (and price). £199
      		
 
			
 
As with the 30 year old, here you get the sense of smoke being absorbed rather than being expressive. There’s not a lot of cask at work here—this has real minerality, and an oily brininess bringing to mind a hot outboard motor on a fishing trip. Halfway in a fire ignites, sending clouds of smoke forward, but then it dries too quickly. Good, but just not enough oak to give it depth and length. £80
      		
 
			
 
Great malt flavor for a blend; creamy with honeyed vanilla, soothing caramel, lively summer fruits, golden raisin, subtle date, and butter cookie. Well-balanced, very clean with no harshness, and very drinkable!

      		
 
			
 
One of the newest of the Distillers Edition family. Here, Royal Lochnagar has been given its secondary resting period in Muscat casks. That nodule of sweetness in the 12 year old has been picked up and extended into a more perfumed world; think blueberry muffin and boysenberry jam. The slight sour/bitter note is a positive, but I think in this case that the finish dominates proceedings and needs to be scaled down a little. £48
      		
 
			
 
Another Glen Moray, this time in a substantially different guise than normal. Yes, this is fresh, sweet, and malty — to be precise, draff-like — but there’s smoke as well, and a fairly decent belt of it. Young it may be — amazingly it’s less than 2 years old — but the palate, especially with water, is cleansing and with vanilla, good phenols, and orris-like dryness. Very intriguing. £18 (200 ml)
-> On page 237 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
The onionskin hue gives the initial indication that this was finished in a port pipe. The nose is light and fruity: raspberry and cranberry juice, even a sprig of mint. Fresh, but with a background funkiness. In time, there’s ripe melon, then lightly musty wood comes through. The palate is light, giving the effect of diluted fruit juice. It’s all just a bit lacking in weight. £25
      		
 
			
 
The name’s a little misleading — this is actually the second whisky to be released from England’s only distillery. It’s only three years old so don’t expect too much depth, but it’s a significant step up from the first release, it’s made by legendary former Laphroaig distiller Iain Henderson and it’s peated, so expect a treat. There’s not much happening on the nose, with some fluffy fruit masking a touch of charcoal smoke. But on the palate it goes through the gears, with melon and pear giving way to a wave of licorice before the peat kicks in and stays. It’s a bit like seeing a talented teenager try out for a sports team: lots of talent, no obvious weaknesses, but not yet big enough to front up to the first team, and in need of some muscle. Nevertheless, surprisingly balanced and rounded, and a sign of good things to come. (Selected British whisky outlets.)
      		
 
			
 
England’s sole whisky distillery (currently, at any rate; anything could and probably will happen) is located in Norfolk, where farmer Andrew Nelstrop started distilling in November 2006. Small batches have been released in ‘Chapters,’ giving whisky lovers teasing glimpses of how the spirit is maturing. Light and delicate — there’s also a peated variant — Nelstrop reckons it will hit its peak in its early teens. I see no reason to dispute him. This chapter is picking up a straw color and has a nose that’s reminiscent of fresh barley, while a little citrus hangs around at the back. Young — think green apple and green grass with milled flour on the tongue — it’s a whistle-clean whisky. £38
      		
 
			
 
The Eigashima distillery, on the Akashi Strait near Kobe, may be the least well known of Japan’s single malt plants, but has a sound claim to be the country’s oldest, as its license to make whisky was granted in 1919 — four years before Yamazaki was built. It has, however, specialized in shochu, and even now only turns its hand to whisky making for two months every year. This 5 year old — bottled for independent Japanese specialist Number One Drinks — represents a tentative move into the single malt market once more.
Pale in color, it shows a typically Japanese cleanliness on the nose that’s cut with a touch of waxiness. It opens with a scented angelica-like lift, there’s even a whiff of something like gooseberry jam. As it opens, the aroma darkens slightly, showing a touch of roasted tea. Water brings out a little yeastiness (typical for some younger whiskies), alongside cucumber, borage, and lime. The palate is sweet with vanilla custard and a sweet, ginger-accented note leading to ripe pear. 
A charming malt, and already well-balanced for its age. Here’s Japan at its lightest. £55. Price in US dollars converted at time of review.
      		
 
			
 
Sweet (caramel, butterscotch), botanical, and liqueur-ish, with honeyed fruit and a peppering of spice throughout (cinnamon, pine needles, anise). Very clean too! But what impresses me most is its maturity for its age. It’s pretty mellow for a two year old 100% straight rye whiskey. (Available only at the distillery.)
      		
 
			
 
Yep, you read that right. A whopping 76.1% ABV. Belgian Owl has matured its whisky in warm and brightly lit warehouses so the spirit sort of cooks. You have to add water and add water and add water until…darn it, you've gone too far. If you do manage to get it right—at about 46%—it offers nothing extra to what you get from the 46% version. Too much like hard work and really not worth the effort. 
      		
 
			
 
It’s not compulsory to follow a Scottish way of whisky making. M. Olivier Perrier in the village of Herisson the middle of the Auvergne has taken a bourbon base (65% corn with malted barley and rye) and distilled it in a Cognac-style alembic before aging it for three years in Troncais oak. Any thoughts that M.Perrier is digging deep into his terroir can be quickly dismissed: the recipe is one for moonshine extracted from a South Carolina musician! His whisky (or should that be whiskey?) is fat and oily, with lots of corn and the scented note that these French whiskies all seem to share. It has a palate where the deep and the savory dance around each other that, while not exactly controlled, would be perfect to accompany an evening of blues in the middle of France. €37 
      		
 
			
 
Thomson is a small, independent New Zealand whisky company with a limited amount of stock originally distilled at the Willowbank distillery, and this is as young as New Zealand whisky currently gets. One suspects it would have benefited from a couple more years, but its simple sugar and spice combo and rich citrus heart make it an uncomplicated but very drinkable session malt. It's a waltz of a whisky that kicks a bit at the death. NZ$85
      		
 
			
 
The distillery makes big claims for this whisky, stressing that it shares the same high production values as Scotland, and the importance of altitude in the Highveld to maturation. This is the first whisky release from a Pretoria brewery, and it is fascinating. The nose is confused, but the palate is liqueur-like, with blackcurrant cordial and Vimto [a UK fruit-herb soda]. Its problem is its youth. It’s not yet fully integrated, and there are immature rootsy notes here, but it’s promising. €36 Currently not available in the U.S. 
      		
 
			
 
A small-barrel aged whiskey. The nose is sweet and fairly simple: cotton candy, wintergreen, faint menthol, and some heat. It’s hot in the mouth, too. The mint/wintergreen gives way to light caramel and sweet fudge; it’s even a bit sticky. There’s a need for more depth to balance the sweetness, and some more age to mellow the heat. More rough-edged than ‘big distiller’ whiskey at this point.  
-> On page 238 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Distilled from “malted Bavarian hard wheat” on the still formerly used at Germain-Robin. Good pedigree; does it deliver? Bread/flour in the aroma, like a fresh bag of flour, with a fruity alcohol edge to it, the wheat tang I know from beer. In the mouth, it comes through as bread and crackers. It’s somewhat hot, but it’s a brandy/aromatic heat: vapor-producing. The finish pulls more grain in, finally. They’re aging some of this; should be a great whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Distilled from “bottle-ready IPA.” Sure is; the hops leap out of the glass, piney and pithy, a real west coast beer and whiskey experience in a glass. Quite a fat mouthfeel for 99 proof, a big oily thing that rolls around the tongue, making itself at home with flaring hop flavor — not really bitter — and an underlying sweetness. Bittering kicks in on the finish. An astonishing experience that really grows on you…but ultimately there’s a lack of depth. Price is per 1 liter.
      		
 
			
 
Distilled from 100% organic rye. Very fresh, oily rye nose, bursts with rye spice fireworks. Tastes like a textbook example of 'what rye does in distillation.' Spicy, oily, hints of mint, with just a bit of vanilla from a month and a half in wood...which is where it fades, needing that barrel complexity. Catoctin Creek is making some nice, clean whiskey, a great start, and I do hope they're tucking some away for the long haul.
      		
 
			
 
A similar story to the 30 year old. Despite a truly excellent nose, this time more sherry influences dominate: think of polished wood, damsons, and a little menthol/camphor and resinous oak. Once again, the palate seems to be slightly dumber than I’d want from a venerable whisky that should be about elegant, complex expression. It’s balanced, just a little faded. Again, maybe higher strength might have done the trick. £140
      		
 
			
 
Hot corn, vanilla, mint, and just a touch of oak spice; this one's been in the barrel under 12 months. Whoo, it's hot, even for 100 proof. All the right parts are here: corn, vanilla, wood, even some mint, and no serious off-flavors, but it's a rough road. Definitely needs some more time in the barrel, but that should do it some good. Gutsy stuff. Price is per 375ml.
      		
 
			
 
Corn pudding and ryespice nose, very plain-spoken, with just the barest hint of berries. Flavors of light custard, corn, rye, brown sugar, light maple, and vanilla ignite a fiery wash across the tongue, with a fairly hot finish. This is a delicate and subtle bourbon, one that would be lost if mixed with something too big, but rewarding when enjoyed neat. Nicely done. 
      		
 
			
 
There are big similarities with this whisky and those being produced at nearby Glann ar Mor. The dominant flavors are soft and sweet, and there's a distinctly soft and feminine side to this single malt, which skips across the palate. There are floral and green fruit notes here, traces of oak, barley, and sweet spice, all very ordered. Not complicated maybe, but very well made indeed.  €20
      		
 
			
 
Down in Tasmania they're about to start distilling a corn mash whiskey and a triple distilled Irish-style one, and here farmer and sand and ice sculptor Peter Bignell is using his own rye to distill spirit on a still he built himself. This is new white spirit made with 100 percent rye and bottled at 40%. It's more pastis than whiskey, a soft licorice and aniseed alcopop which is way too drinkable. A rising star. $AUS 99/500ml
      		
 
			
 
Why is it that so many great beer-producing European nations, many of them with Germanic roots, didn't progress to whisky making? Appenzeller brewery makes this malt using old beer casks, and they have softened the edges of the malt and given it a liquid honey frame around which woody-earthy notes and unripe dates create an intriguing mix. A long, long way from the Alps to the Scottish Highlands, but a lofty malt nevertheless.  €45 
      		
 
			
 
Matured in 500-liter port pipes, the color is that of a Provence rosé wine. Young, but the oak is apparent. Though it’s slightly hot when neat, there is distinct raspberry and cranberry fruitiness, nettles, grass, and, with water, chalk. Sweet on the tip of the tongue, there are little glimpses of raspberry fool and some caramelized notes from the cask, but it’s not yet fully integrated. £95
-> On page 239 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Described as 'French blended hand-crafted whisky hand-made and finished in French Limousin oak,' this is a real weirdo. It's more interesting than many blends and quite likeable, but it tastes less of whisky and more like a thin Southern Comfort, with liqueur-like orange, some menthol, gentle spice, and other aromatics. Hard to believe nothing has been added.
      		
 
			
 
The weakest of the Double Barrel trio on offer, this has a slightly spirity nose with a somewhat unpleasant off note, but the taste promises more than the nose delivers. The oily, peaty Caol Ila is seemingly held in check by the Tamdhu on the one hand, while the fresh, zingy, sherbet-like characteristics of Tamdhu are tantalizingly faint. In the end, pepper and peat dominate.€40
      		
 
			
 
Interesting: “Bottled by The Tennessee Spirits Company, Pewaukee, WI.” Woody nose, spiked with dry rye spiciness: black pepper, dried mint. My, that’s hot. It’s a rye rocket, and the wood’s drying up every bit of sweet here, leaving my tongue wrinkly. A bit of water, though, and this is a much happier whiskey; softer, sweeter notes come out, and the mint cheers up. (sourced whiskey) 
      		
 
			
 
Distilled from an almost extinct strain of heirloom corn (Crooked Creek), this is a fully aromatic white whiskey: fresh white corn, crisp apple, and pear float high over the liquid. A soft mouth—not overly hot—brings the fruit, but the corn is a solid underpinning. There’s a dry, almost mineral component to the finish. No flaws, interesting flavors, and nicely integrated for an unaged spirit. 
      		
 
			
 
Not a lot of details offered past the “Cane • Corn Spirit” and “aged in oak for 2 years” on the label, and talk of a “honey mixture.” Color is medium-amber; smell is thin, sweet, and lightly fruity. Not unpleasant in the mouth; candy-sweet, maybe a bit bland, and an ashy hint. The finish does have a little ‘bit-o-honey’ flavor that hangs high for a long time. Overall, not bad, but not real exciting either.  
      		
 
			
 
Wood-smoked malt, a spirit aged in oak with fruitwood chips added makes for a distinctive, idiosyncratic whisky. Nose is warehouse reek, mellow fruitwood smoke, and sweet, light pipe tobacco, with a slight hint of cinnamon. Mouth is hot, but soft, with lots of malt and that unfamiliar flow of fruitwood smoke. Thin and edgy up front, but as the smoke spreads and the malt sweetens, it evolves. Finish is a bit abrupt.
      		
 
			
 
Alibi is a new blended whiskey: 27.5% 3 year old straight whiskeys, 72.5% GNS. A new American blended whiskey? Give it a whiff: hot caramel, a bit of fruit, and store-brand vanilla. It’s hot in the mouth, sweet with more caramel and vanilla, fringed with cinnamon and oak. Not bad, but it’s squeezed at its $24 price by perfectly good straight bourbons.
      		
 
			
 
Furniture polish, red raspberries, popovers, a vigorous nose, going in several directions. Hot grainy mouth, not overwhelmed by wood; a simple grain finish like twice-baked biscuits, with a light wreathing of meadow mint. The character of the grain comes through quite clearly, and it’s distinctly different from the Myer Rye. But what’s here is not particularly interesting or well-integrated.
      		
 
			
 
This entry-level Gibson’s is cut from the same fine cloth as the exquisite Gibson’s 18 and their lavishly flavorful 12 year old. Immediately, rum and butter laced with spirit and hot pepper seep into sweet and sizzling rye spices. Then light berry-ish notes turn to Concord grapes, pear juice, and soft yellow apples, as bitter walnut skins counter rich maple ice cream. A slight waxiness lends a satisfying weight. (Canada only)C$26
      		
 
			
 
When introducing new world whisky, I tell folks to treat it not as a scotch but as a totally different whisky. But how far can you go? The French have a “whisky” made with buckwheat — technically not a grain — and chestnuts. Now we have this. This is light, sweet, with flavored candy and fruit jelly; lots of pruney, grapey Cognac notes. There's the issue. Is it a nice drink? Yes. Is it really a whisky? It's up for debate.  
-> On page 240 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Despite the high strength, the aromas strike the nose like a pillow in slow motion. Greengages, corn, and ripening lemons lift from the glass. It’s a thick, unctuous, layered mouthful with honey, gooseberry, and lemon acidity, though a splash of water produces softer notes of Scottish tablet and evaporated milk. A little sourness in the finish. Sure, part of the allure of Boutique-y whisky is the batch variations, but this is quite a different beast from the magnificent Batch 1. £72
      		
 
			
 
Dry, dusty corn with some fruit flashing around, and an odd aroma of cracked limestone. Simple corn spirit, lightly sweet and clean, not hot (especially for 50%), and a smooth finish. As the company notes, this is a spirit for mixing, but it’s a surprisingly easy sipper, if not overly rewarding. 
      		
 
			
 
Aged exclusively in cognac casks, here is Hanyu again showing its thick, earth-rooted solidity, even to the extent of some rootier elements showing. That said, on the nose, some water brings out jasmine, frangipani, and mace, with a light buttery note. It’s very spicy on the tongue: nutmeg mixed with bitter roots, but as with the Ace of Clubs, water just increases dryness. A bit too rigid for me. ¥14,000	
      		
 
			
 
Quite pale, looks more like scotch. Nose is hot, sweet, a bit minty. Hot in the mouth, thin, sweet, with flashy mint and corn. Finish is fiery, and a tad bitter with wood, especially bitey high in the mouth. Young, rough, and without the raunchy fullness that can justify youthful braggadocio. There are better bourbons for only a dollar or two more. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Hot oak and bubble gum in the nose, with a slight solvent hit of fingernail polish. Light corn in the mouth, oaky bitterness, a flash of the polish, and pretty hot for 40%. A very thin mouthfeel, not that
appealing. The nicest thing about it, though, is the finish, which is surprisingly smooth, sweet, and almost rich. You’d want to dump some cola and ice in here. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
A single malt it may be, because it’s the product of one distillery, but a single grain it’s not. In fact, there are three malted grains in this, and that makes for a punchy, vibrant, fruity, and menthol-tinged new make spirit, but with a sweet cereal note and some distinctive spiciness from the rye. Different and interesting up to a point; very well made, but still new make spirit at the end of the day. €30
      		
 
			
 
Green corn, cooked corn, roasted corn, all tumbling over each other in the nose. Very sweet, young bourbon without much drying from the oak, but no youthful fire. Tastes like a lower row barrel. Finish is also sweet. Not a lot of complexity. Sourced whiskey, from Dickel.
      		
 
			
 
Dry grain fills the air on first pour. This clear unaged whisky just gushes feed mill aromas. The all-wheat spirit is distilled from grain grown in a single Ontario field, then coarse-milled for making whisky. Sweet, creamy, and oh so peppery hot, it fades from citrus fruit and bitter black licorice to absolute nothingness. Our forefathers drank new make whisky. Let’s hope it was as tasty as this one.
C$40/375 ml
      		
 
			
 
This is the latest in an ongoing series of organic, single-field white whiskies from Toronto distillery. In 2013, summer rains imbued Ontario spring wheat with softer, nuttier, and more complex flavors than 2012. These show here on the nose as lemon oil, fragrant spring violets, and newly harvested grain. A sweet, spicy palate is alive with real lemons, yellow plums, fresh straw, and sweet, lingering white pepper. Mouth coating and big. (
C$40/375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Unaged, triple distilled spirit, produced and bottled at Piedmont Distillers in North Carolina. Clean nose with hints of unripe honeydew, bond paper, and wet crushed chalk. Very soft on the palate, clean, with no burn at all. Slippery-smooth, a tiny bit sweet. Tastes like good vodka, really; not much grain here at all. Easy to drink, but…where’s the excitement?
-> On page 241 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Mason jar packaging makes for an awkward pour; had to be said. Nose is hot, with a fruity sweetness and fainter notes of grassy green corn, flowers, and rock. Clean and sweet, with more corn character here, along with other fresh grains. Not nasty, not bad, but seems to be mostly aimed as a base for Palmetto’s apple pie and peach flavors. Otherwise…it’s sweet, corn-tinged vodka.
      		
 
			
 
An all-rye grain mash yields this almost tequila-like whisky that was blended to tempt the agave-blessed Mexican palate. Hot, earthy, and somewhat muddy, with the black pepper signature of tequila, it gradually becomes sweet and creamy with vague hints of black licorice. Strong herbal undertones suggest dill pickles. Hard slatey rye grain softens into blue clay. The sintering heat lingers right to the end, as do earthiness and agave-like black pepper ¡Hola!
 
 Mexican pesos
      		
 
			
 
Sweet creamy toffee, with hot and spicy undertones, builds gradually to a peak then fades into classic bitter pith. Caramels mute the hardness of rye grain as it, too fades in advancing waves of gingery pepper. Definitely a mixing whisky now, Lord Calvert tells one and all that their cocktail was made with wood-aged whisky. Hints of grassiness and dry white wine add breadth to a whisky that in days long past was intended to be sipped neat.
      		
 
			
 
It's the sheer chutzpah of these young whisky producers that I adore. They don't care. They're skate punks crashing through the whisky suburbs, flipping cartwheels and turning the world upside down. This isn't great, truth be told, but what nerve to try making a rye! And while it's hard to tell with this most difficult of grains, I reckon this will come off. Hickory, licorice, and spice are in place. Now we need balance. Watch this space. 495 Krone/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
Light gold. Fresh and clean, with light draff notes. Cool porcelain, lemon, cereal husk. It becomes more expressive on the tongue, though it remains subtle. A bit of a stealth bomb because the palate shows plenty of spice, cinnamon toast, and baklava. The finish reveals some green notes. When you add water, it becomes incredibly minty. Fragile, but if you fancy a Bunna' julep, then look no further. £69
      		
 
			
 
There is something very bedtime drink about this Glenallachie, without it being a dram to have before retiring for the night. It’s to do with the aromatic sensation of powdered malted milk and cocoa powder. The palate is simple, with some fresh apple, pear juice, and a lightly sour edge. The draff/malted milk re-emerges in the middle of the tongue. With water, pears come through, making it similar to a tequila blanco. All rather delicate. £63
      		
 
			
 
A straightforward bourbon that takes few risks but also offers few rewards. You’ll find a mélange of orange, apricot, sweet corn, vanilla, soft spice and honey. Light, youthful finish, with a kiss of oak. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
The Braunstein craft distillery and brewery lies southwest of Copenhagen at Køge Harbor. This one uses barley peated to a phenolic content of 60 ppm and boy, do you know it! Any balance of character is resoundingly bested by acrid aromas of charcoal sticks, sooty fireplaces, and blackened toast. The oily mouthfeel oozes cherry soda, bubblegum, maraschino, Ama’r Stang, and Band-Aids, with chicory on the finish. This needs better balance; at present, it’s like a pyroclastic cloud erupting from the glass. 795kr
      		
 
			
 
Bottle 170 of this Delaware distillery’s first batch. Full, oily aroma of sweet, wet, crushed corn; almost too rich. Very clean on the palate; light and sweet, a bit of dry leafiness. Impressive first effort. 
      		
 
			
 
A locally-grown mashbill of 75% barley, 20% malt, 5% oats. Very aromatic for unaged spirit: fresh, grainy, a bit feinty/vegetal, split rock, and a note like well-rinsed crisp sauerkraut. It’s a quick and lively one in the mouth, sweet and slippery, grain and hints of fresh herbs (fennel, mace, white peppercorn). The finish is a bit sticky—the oats, maybe—and sweet. Interesting stuff.
-> On page 242 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Another experimental “Whims” bottlings; this one is 95% malted rye and 5% malted barley. Nose is sharp, with notes of cinnamon candies and a bit of solvents. Better on the palate: a cooling breeze of minty rye, some citrus, and growing bitter rye oil as it finishes. Fairly simple, pleasant stuff, but the nose is not inviting. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
A “whiskey distilled from rye malt mash,” which indicates aging in used barrels. Still has a deep coloring from port barrel finishing. Nose is quite peppery, youthfully vegetal, and sweet with fruit, again, presumably from the port barrel. Rye grassiness and spice in the mouth, wrapped with layers of port fruit and pepperiness that roll into the finish. Smooth for the strength, though the port is pushy and the flavors could be better balanced. An interesting direction.
      		
 
			
 
This could be seen as a brave young bottling of the sometimes divisive Fettercairn single malt, but Glenkeir Treasures has acquired some interesting casks which showcase the youthful whisky to good advantage. Wet cardboard, starch, and savory notes on the initial nose, settling down to something fruitier and with milk chocolate. Floral, nutty, and slightly peppery on the palate, with almonds, toffee, cocoa powder, and gentle citrus fruit. Quite soft in the finish, with elegant spices and milky coffee. (
£35/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
Well, they got the proof right! From JEM Beverage (Carrollton, Texas). Sweet cedar and citrus in the nose, dominant and one-noted. Sweet on the tongue, with that fresh green cedar character and more sweet citrus; a touch of oak in the finish. Not a lot else.
      		
 
			
 
This is pot still Woodford Reserve bourbon finished in Sonoma-Cutrer Chardonnay wine barrels. (It’s the second iteration in the Master’s Collection, following the Four Grain release.) The wine influence is immediately obvious-it is sweet and fruity on the nose and palate. Notes of caramel apples, toffee pudding, butterscotch, toasted pecan, and peach crisp. Polished oak finish. I’d like a little less sweetness-or a little more of something to balance it, like more dried oak spice. 

      		
 
			
 
A more significant oak impact when compared to the standard Old Forester bourbons, which is evident by the polished leather, tobacco, and dry resin notes (especially on the finish). There’s an attempt to balance all this wood with notes of dusty corn, coconut, mint, vanilla, juniper, and dark berried fruit (blueberry, black raspberry, black cherry), but I don’t think it quite gets there. This bourbon is a nice change of pace (and I understand the reason behind this whisky -- to emulate bourbons from the era of Repeal), but I prefer the Old Forester “Signature” 100 proof to this whiskey. I’m happy drinking the whiskeys of today, thank you. (Price is per 375 ml.)
      		
 
			
 
A bourbon with a gentle demeanor and easy drinkability. The whisky is nicely balanced, with sweet notes of corn, caramel, and vanilla blending in nicely with subtle fruit and dried spice. An uncomplicated, fairly straight-forward bourbon for everyday drinking. I just wish there was more to it. 

      		
 
			
 
Shy is the word. Pale in color, again suggestive of little cask interaction. There’s a little hint of white currant and light cereal, delicate and fragile — more fragile than the Balmenach — with a little touch of white chocolate. As it opens, out comes violet. The mouth is tense, as if everything is still baled up, even after all this time. Very light acidity gives a certain freshness that water doesn’t shake loose. Simply not enough cask. £67
      		
 
			
 
Finishing in octave-sized PX casks has resulted in the creation of an oddity: the world’s first Ardbeg cordial. There’s smoke, pigskin leather, and a sudden rootiness, mixed with damp woodland, stewing Victoria plums, and a weirdly lactic note. This continues on the tongue, giving an effect like smoked cream cheese dotted with raisins. Hmm…£120/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
A peculiar Auchentoshan. The Bordeaux wine dominates, with its distinctive winery aroma and flavor. Red raspberry, red currant, and a hint of strawberry comprise the core of this whisky, with underlying notes of vanilla cream, cocoa, and a hint of demerara rum. The whisky spent nine of its years in Bordeaux wine casks. I would have preferred less time in the wine casks for such a delicate whisky. 

-> On page 243 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Dominant notes of citrus (lemon, lime) and other tropical fruits (coconut, mango) on the nose. On the palate, the whisky is simple and uncomplicated. The entry is soft and malty, and then it becomes dry and gently oaky. Not overly inspiring, but those who purchase the whisky for its rarity value (the distillery closed in 1983), shouldn’t be discouraged from actually drinking the stuff some day. 

      		
 
			
 
Aged in bourbon oak and then finished in Guigal Hermitage Rouge Syrah wine casks. Bright notes of red raspberry, rhubarb, currant, plum, and (not surprisingly) grape, with background notes of vanilla and caramel. I find the syrah notes entertaining on the nose, but too dominant on the palate for balance. The fruit becomes waxy and hides a lot of Bruichladdich subtle complexities. (Bottled exclusively for The Party Source.) 

      		
 
			
 
Very pale. A little thin in body, sharp and penetrating. Very Caol Ila-like, with notes of damp peat, Greek olives, seaweed, mustard seed, incense, gin herbs, freshly ground pepper, and vanilla malt. Smoldering peat finish. I would like to see more body to this whisky. (634 bottles produced.) 

      		
 
			
 
Not immature, but very intense and unabashed. Sweet barley notes and vanilla are beaten up by coal tar, damp kiln smoke, and fiery spice on the finish. For those who like their Islay whiskies young. Very young. I would have waited a couple more years before bottling this one. Pure testosterone. (Bottled for Maxwell Street Trading Co.)

      		
 
			
 
Somewhat sidelined thanks to the presence of Glenrothes and Glen Grant (not to mention Speyburn) in the same village, Glen Spey gets on with producing fillings for numerous Diageo blends (primarily J&B). As a result, it’s rarely seen as a single malt, with even independent bottlings pretty thin on the ground.
This 21 year old is the color of old gold, and while the nose initially surprises with a hint of suet dumplings, there’s a rich and dangerously hedonistic sweetness behind, which is strangely hard to pin down. Coconut cream? Suntan lotion? Blackening butter in a frying pan? Eventually it appears to settle in the crème brûlée area, along with a fruity base (sweet, of course). There’s a light green note that suggests it might be distillery character coming through, but water suggests it’s new wood. 
In the mouth, there’s vanilla fudge and toffee, before a hint of muesli alongside dried mango. Overall it’s a bit like eating breakfast in a new ski chalet. Showy and impressive, but for me the wood’s in charge. 
      		
 
			
 
This is coming from a first fill sherry hogshead, so there’s little surprise that the color is as dark as pitch. This is Glenfarclas at its most concentrated; less about dried fruit and more about highly-roasted espresso with a glass of ancient Marsala on the side. The palate shows firm grip moving into astringency. Too much cask for me, but if this is what rocks your boat, go for it! £840
      		
 
			
 
A quintet of releases showing examples of The Glenlivet from five decades, issued to support The Glenlivet Generations 70 year old bottling. All are available individually or in a limited edition set (50 only) for £2,850; these bottlings are not currently available in the U.S.

The nose immediately betrays the fact that this has been matured in a first-fill sherry hogshead. It’s akin to an artisan’s workshop, all leather oil and strange resins. There’s an intriguing hint of curry spices and truffle, but all in all this is about density, black fruits (damson), allspice, and clove. The cask is in charge. The palate has more tannin than you perhaps want — powerful and grippy with lots of nut and tea-like tannins; too grippy for me. £500 
      		
 
			
 
Finished in sherry casks. The sherry adds a nutty toffee sweetness, bramble, and other assorted red fruit and raisin, with the tell-tale Glenmorangie complexity tucked underneath. A bit heavy on the sherry, though, for such a subtle spirit.

      		
 
			
 
Lushly fruity and quite sweet. A bit too sappy on the nose, but more even-keeled on the palate. The fruit notes (nectarine, plum, orange marmalade) sit on a bed of caramel, shortbread, and thick honey, with chocolate-covered almonds emerging on the finish. For those who like their Highland Park youthful and very sherried. (Bottled for Grape Vine Market) 

      		
 
			
 
This whisky is not as good as the similarly-aged, more polished and refined, standard distillery-bottled 25 year old cask-strength expression (our "Whisky of the Year" several years ago). This single cask bottling from a sherry cask is intensely sherried. Sappy fruit notes dominate the palate. Damp, somewhat tired, oak notes are prevalent throughout. The whisky is also nutty, with heathery peat notes emerging occasionally. The floral, heather-honeyed grace treasured in Highland Park struggles to emerge, and ultimately loses the battle. (Bottled exclusively for Park Avenue Liquors.) 

-> On page 244 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Rich and viscous in texture. Sappy waxed fruit, maple syrup, and nougat. Becoming quite nutty with emerging notes of damp peat, dates, plum and blueberry. The sherry is fairly dominant and masks some of the whisky's subtleties. After dinner with a cigar, perhaps? (Bottled exclusively for Beltramo's.)
      		
 
			
 
Inchmurrin has enjoyed a higher profile since early 2013, when the range was extended to include 15, 18, and 21 year old
expressions. The lineup also boasts striking new packaging and is bottled non-chill filtered. Orange fondant cream and peaches on the nose, with caramel in the background. Fuller-bodied than the 15 year old expression, with pineapple cheesecake and ginger on the palate. The finish is quite long, and spicier and more peppery than that of the 15 year old bottling (also reviewed this issue). £70
      		
 
			
 
Jura’s newest offering, and the oldest in the portfolio. It is drastically different than its younger siblings-this one is quite sherried, as its deep amber color with reddish hues suggests. I really enjoy how this whisky tastes on the palate-it’s rich and silky with notes of fruitcake, toffee, maple, orange chocolate truffle, cinnamon, and nutmeg. You’ll find the same notes on the nose, but there are also elements-cloying fruit, perfume, and a peculiar fleshy component-which detract from an otherwise lovely whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
There’s no age statement, but the whisky is less than 10 years old -- and is a little green. Notes of toffee almonds, ripe fruit, freshly-ground pepper, chorizo, bacon fat, and damp peat smoke. Lingering smoke and brine on the finish. A few more years of maturation should improve this whisky significantly.
      		
 
			
 
Quite palate-coating for a Lowlander, with sweet notes of vanilla malt, grist, honey and marshmallow. More subtle notes of cut grass, linseed oil, rubber erasers, and chalky antacid tablets. A peculiar-tasting whisky. 

      		
 
			
 
Matured in a refill sherry cask. (A first-fill sherry cask would have completely dominated Rosebank’s delicate flavor profile.) With the addition of water (which is necessary), the whisky becomes quite cloudy. Rosebank’s traditional honeyed vanilla, grass/hay, and soft fruit are accentuated by lightly sherried, soft toffee flavors. An interesting whisky, but the flavors are not clean and well-defined enough to warrant a higher rating.

      		
 
			
 
Enjoyable creamy texture and medium-bodied. Gently sweet notes of light toffee and vanilla custard, especially towards the front of the palate. Nutty too, with some sultana in the background. Gentle oak notes towards the finish. A very clean, well-balanced whisky that’s very easy to drink but also takes few risks. 

      		
 
			
 
Plenty of citrus zest, along with subtle pineapple and coconut on the nose. The palate begins with honeyed-malt sweetness, followed by the citrus fruit, but then quickly turns dry and resinous, with dried nuts and spicy oak on the finish. The intensity of the dryness on the finish surprised me and detracted from an otherwise well-rounded dram. 

      		
 
			
 
Amber in hue, this starts off very succulent and approachable, with some butterscotch, vanilla, and caramel toffee, but like its brother, it dries. The palate is lighter than the 14 year old, and seems to float, lacking an anchor. When it does come down, it does so with a cereal crunch. Water lightens it still further, just leaving a mix of oak and cereal, and an astringent finish.
€56
      		
 
			
 
The original Penderyn is finished in Madeira casks. I like the original better (which I rated an 84), as it tastes more mature and the Madeira seems to dovetail better with the other flavors. Fruity (red raspberry, strawberry, banana), with underlying sweet notes (honeyed vanilla, caramel, a hint of butterscotch). Quick, clean finish. Maybe this whisky just needed a little more aging for everything to come together?
-> On page 245 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Cooley distillery’s oldest blend to date. Packaged in what looks like a very large perfume bottle. Elegant and creamy on the nose, with vanilla, coconut, grass, and suggestions of bourbon. Similar on the palate, but more reserved. Becoming dry on the finish with lingering charred oak. I think the slightly austere oaky finish detracts from what otherwise would be a very nice blend. The best part of this whiskey is the nose.
      		
 
			
 
Made from 100% malted barley (wash from the adjacent Flying Dog brewery) and aged for a minimum of two years. Surprisingly good for such a young whisky. Layers of sweetness (honey, caramel, toffee), with some nutty/nougat notes, bourbon-like charred oak, and background spice. Some youthful “burn” emerges toward the latter half of the palate -- a little careful aging would smooth out the finish and add depth. Still, a very nice effort.
      		
 
			
 
To a great extent, this is traditional blended Irish whiskey by the numbers. Its problem — through no fault of its own — is that it’s bland compared to the wave of full-flavored whiskeys that have been released of late. The twelve years in cask don't add much to the standard Tullamore Dew beyond a sharp note. The apple and pear flavors are perfectly acceptable, however, and the whiskey's pleasant enough; it's just not very exciting.
      		
 
			
 
Indeed smooth, and malty, with vanilla, shortbread, golden raisin, and macadamia nuts. Light oak spice emerges on a fairly quick finish. (It is only 8 years old, after all.) Pleasant and easy-going.

      		
 
			
 
London-based specialist The Whisky Exchange won’t reveal where its main Islay brand is distilled, though the smart money is on a distillery not that far away from the ferry terminal that gives it its name. This expression is less phenolic than you might expect; there’s more rapeseed oil than smoke, but it does have a nori wrap shoreline character. The palate is discreet, with pineapple and creaminess leading the way toward a bonfire made of old fishboxes. £60
      		
 
			
 
The labeling is a little confusing. Small batch implies a marriage of multiple barrels, not just a bottling from a single barrel; the label seems to imply both. Plus, there’s no indication of the source of this whiskey, or its age. Regardless, this is one of the sweetest and mellowest rye whiskeys I’ve tasted. Spicy fresh mint, cinnamon, white pepper, and subtle clove are tamed by sweet notes of toasted marshmallow, cotton candy, creamy vanilla, candied fruit, and red licorice. Soft finish. Rather gentle for a rye whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
The nice thing about Islay whiskies is that they often show their true nature better at a younger age. Malty sweet and incredibly herbal (almost gin-like), with emerging tar, smoked seaweed, and olive. Medicinal in nature, with lingering tar and brine on the finish. Fairly straight-forward (what do you expect for 8 years old?) but a pretty decent showing for a whisky this young.
      		
 
			
 
Sweet corn, along with caramel, vanilla, and more subtle ripe summer fruits (on the nose and palate). Light, slightly brash finish. Rather sweet, somewhat youthful tasting, straight-forward, and unpretentious. Not something I would be drinking neat, but it does fare better on the rocks. (The ice and cold water cut through and calm the sweetness.) I think a little more aging would add some depth, and balance some of the sweetness with more oak spice.
      		
 
			
 
Richer, sweeter (with more caramelized sugars), fruitier, and spicier than the standard Canadian Mist (reviewed below). Still, I wish it were a bit smoother (especially on the finish) for something I would consider drinking neat on a regular basis. There’s no age statement, but a couple more years of aging would be nice. Like the flagship Canadian Mist, this whisky still plays it fairly conservatively — not a lot of risk-taking here. But I think it’s slightly better than Crown Royal Black (its logical competitor) which is not as smooth on the finish, and you can get Black Diamond for half the price.
      		
 
			
 
Canadian Mist with flavor and sweetener. Boozy but fresh peach, vanilla, and sugar nose; smells like a fresh, juicy peach cobbler; where's the whisky? Very much dessert-like in the mouth, sweet, full, but not cloying; points for that. Finish is peach candies, vanilla, and finally some whisky notes. Even at 35%, I'd like a lot more whisky character here; otherwise, what's the point? Still, head and shoulders above Southern Comfort's flavor experiments.
-> On page 246 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
This is very different to previous Belgian Owl bottlings, but it’s important because it takes the distillery to a new place. There are hints of Glen Garioch or Springbank here, with green banana skin, raw barley, and some peppery tomato. The fruity center just about survives the onslaught, but it’s not an easy ride. €47 Currently not available in the U.S.
      		
 
			
 
Thomson has discovered and bottled stocks from the Willowbank distillery, which closed in the 90s. It was, almost certainly, the world’s most southern distillery, located at Dunedin, a South Island city populated by Scots (the name is an amalgam of Dundee and Edinburgh). The whisky? Not bad at all. Sweet, edgy, prickly, with pineapple and kumquat, banana, and salt and pepper. 
      		
 
			
 
Bottled as one of last year’s Diageo Special Releases, this is very minty to start: mint chocolate to be precise, before Brazil nut and toasted bran appear, given balance by creamy oak. This mix of nuts and sweetness continues on the tongue alongside an early burst of strawberry, but the center and back palate are foosty (as we say in Scotland), or dusty, as you probably do.
      		
 
			
 
New make from the same mashbill as Evan Williams, bottled “straight from the still.” Much higher proof than the others, but not noticeably hotter in the nose; that’s light corn and grass, with a bit of minty spice. Hotter in the mouth, but quite pleasant and evolving: fresh mint gives way to light corn, then a slightly oily slip to brisk sweetness…and you realize you didn’t notice the serious overproof. A well-behaved white dog. 
      		
 
			
 
The latest addition to Tasmania’s burgeoning and diverse whisky industry bottles for the first time in October 2011. This is just 4 years old, and while this isn’t Kavalan, the flavor is amazing: full and rich sherry, honeyed, intense, and fruity. The score reflects the fact that it’s well-made, yet way short of its optimum age. But wow — what a prospect this distillery is! AUD150 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
An odd touch of the roasted-grain smell of the dryhouse here, then youthful whiskey underneath it: sweet, mint, barrel. Flavors tumble across the tongue: cocoa, mint, coconut, grass, and a bit of spice. This is six months in the barrel, and it's good for that; I also like that it's all Montana-grown grain. But you have to wonder what it will be like after another four years. 
      		
 
			
 
Nant is everything an idyllic island distillery should be, sited in the wilds of Tasmania with a smart visitor center and a bar that overlooks the rolling, rugged countryside. The whiskey, though, is surprisingly gentle and soft. There is an overly simplistic sweet sherry version, but this gutsier, berry-soaked, sweet and rounded version is the one to watch. It's a work in progress, but the cleanliness and flavor development hint at great things. Watch this space.  $AUS 190/500 ml
      		
 
			
 
White whiskey, amazing legs on the glass. Classic white dog nose: green corn, estery fruits, a bit sharp, but not burny hot. Clean taste of corn spirit, no off flavors, and very well-mannered for 50%, unaged whiskey; I can hold this on my tongue easily, and there are some good bits of sweet candy as it rolls off. Nicely done.
      		
 
			
 
There’s the sweet reek of new make: barely ripe apricot and peach, green grain, a hint of spice. The spirit is surprisingly dry, with shots of grain, pepper, and some clean alcohol notes on the top, but a well-mannered 100 proof indeed, and easy to hold on the tongue. There’s a dry twist of anise on the finish. An interesting — and promising — white whiskey. (Pennsylvania only.)
      		
 
			
 
Slightly medicinal/mineral edge to a nose full of caramel. Hot in the mouth, slick and sweet, but with some currant and quince floating around; there’s more than a bit of youthful whiteness here. The finish stays hot and prickles the tongue a bit. A bold Canadian, with some flaws, but interesting nonetheless. 
-> On page 247 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
The American craft whiskey movement has produced some unique riffs on classic spirits. Here we get a classic Irish-type whiskey made in Tennessee and aged in small, 15-gallon barrels. It’s all lush Irish on the nose, with caramel, green apple, dark chocolate, oak. On the palate the oak from the small barrel overtakes caramel apple with its smoky barrel char, sawdust, and clove spice. An interesting idea, but perhaps better realized in larger or used barrels.
      		
 
			
 
A sweet, aromatic nose, with fresh cream, flaked almonds, macaroons, pomegranate juice, and a veneer of vanilla from this refill barrel. The palate starts warm and sweet, then revs up to full power; light butterscotch, cotton candy, clementine, Toledo marzipan, and corn kernels, with a hint of fresh green salad leaves. The short finish picks over corn, cake mix, and cream soda. Power, but not enough finesse from the wood here. £64
      		
 
			
 
Very sweet butterscotch, sultanas, and smatterings of oak play off lime juice, sweet and sour sauce, and pulling citrus pith in a spirity but quintessentially smooth whisky. Creamy caramel shows hints of fudge that softens the crispness of freshly split red cedar shakes. Simple and tightly integrated. A sintering peppery heat quickly dominates the palate even as overripe fruits emerge in a finish that moves single-mindedly into a classic citric zest. A frisky mixer that is well worth sipping.
      		
 
			
 
The malt was “lightly smoked” with a 60/40 mix of apple and cherry woods. It is very light in the nose, which gives a fruitbowl—apple, white grape, pear—topped with wet malt, and just a hint of that smoke. Very hot, as expected, but the smoke is more pronounced, with a creamy texture. Water brings out more malt, and notes of cocoa, ripe Red Delicious apple, and nuts…and a somewhat rough finish. Interesting, and mixable.
      		
 
			
 
Given that this is described as a blend and it's from the New Zealand Whisky Co., you'd be well within your rights to stay clear. But it's not, it’s a blend of two single malts from two different countries, New Zealand and Australia; what will soon be known as Hybrid. It's not the best from either country, dumbing down the big flavors and leaving the fruit and spice falling a little flat. Arguably another good entry level whisky, though.  NZ$95
      		
 
			
 
This is a Spanish whisky from the Granada region. It's not Spain's first whisky or its best, but this could eventually be a contender. Its problem is that it has sulfur all over it: a deliberate attempt to empower the malt, or sloppy whisky making? Get past it though, and this is a thin, light orange and mandarin aperitif whisky, and ideal to serve chilled early on a sunny, summer Spanish evening. It's about context. Not earth-shattering though. €80
      		
 
			
 
Fiery young stuff! The nose is spicy/slicey, with a sharp sweetness, fresh oak, and a hint of solvent. A lot of oak in the mouth, almost drying, and just a bit astringent on the tongue. The finish turns softer, sweeter, but stays oaky. The wood’s a bit overwhelming on this one. It’s sourced whiskey that’s then finished in Long Island wine barrels. Some finishes work better than others.
      		
 
			
 
It’s not whisky in Canada, nor does it pretend to be. Canada’s three-year aging law keeps un-aged whisky off the market. So, with no moonshine or firewater tradition, Canada’s craft distillers must make their white spirits as palatable as the matured whiskies they could eventually become. The result is simple, gingery, and sweet, with latent peppermint, licorice, and beer. The palate dissolves in a longish finish where sizzling pepper grows refreshingly bitter before fading to… nothingness. 
C$37
      		
 
			
 
Sharp, bitterly vegetal, reminiscent of crushed turnip or radish; sweet oaky caramel in the background. Building block flavors—oak, rye oil, more turnip, sweet cereal—not well integrated. As if a very tight-cut new make had been put in a barrel and rolled and heated continuously for a short period of time (with some turnips). Finish is initially sweet, then closes with a bitter note. Turnip dissipates as it airs, but the memory lingers. Sourced whiskey. 
      		
 
			
 
Craigellachie is one of Scotland’s most interesting distilleries: its worm tubs providing a deliberately sulfury new make whose aromas flash off after maturation to reveal a deeply floral, pineapple-accented palate. Here, sadly, an inactive cask has meant that cabbagey sulfur has not been fully worked out. The fleshiness of the mature spirit is emerging, but this should have been kept in cask for another five years or so. Lacks balance and maturity. £60
-> On page 248 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Craft beer whiskey: mashbill of 80% malt/20% rye malt, fermented with a Belgian ale yeast that yields spicy aromas. Nose is mostly young oak, like a small barrel whiskey, but there are some subtle spice notes and sweet malt. Creamy mouth, sweet but not sticky, and the orange and spice I’m picking up are likely from that yeast. Body is luscious; best part of the whiskey, because the finish turns prickly. There’s promise here, but delivery’s delayed. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Distilled from an oatmeal stout with a shot of peat, this intrigued even before the cap popped. It does smell like an oatmeal stout: cocoa, grains, fresh bread, restrained smoke, mixed with small-barrel oak. The smoke blows up in the mouth, much more evident, and the chocolaty, honey-sweet base rolls underneath…but it’s shallow, without the richness of a properly-aged scotch. Craft whiskeys want to grow up so fast, but this is like a kid in his dad’s clothes. (400 bottles only) Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
The lush, weighty mouthfeel of this affordable mixing whisky surprises, as does the gently complex parade of ripe red cherries and plums, Weetabix cereal, dry green hay, pencil shavings, and blistering ginger root. There’s a lot of whisky here, though it’s light and subtle. What burns in the mouth is slippery smooth in the throat, ending in classic Canadian bitter grapefruit pith. Tasting suggestion: add ginger ale. A pleasing citron residue lingers in the empty glass.
      		
 
			
 
Black bottle, cocked-fist logo. Sourced whiskey, infused with “green tea, hibiscus, eucalyptus, fennel, gingko and more.” Smells 
-ish, bright floral and woodsy notes, with a medicinal twang. Quite sweet, but not sticky; the herbs keep it perky. The whiskey is tamped down by the sweet and infusion; the finish gets even more medicinal. I’d like less sweet, and more whiskey. Not sure who the market is for this, but it makes a tasty add to tea.
      		
 
			
 
Light brown sugar, orange candy, and cinnamon on the nose, along with just a hint of funk. Electric in the mouth, zapping out to every corner and tooth with bitter oils and hot alcohol, with a backing wall of corn sweetness. The finish is almost a relief. Take the rattlesnake graphic as a warning; this one's not kidding.
      		
 
			
 
The bottle states “Aged less than four years” but the nose says probably less than two. Unseasoned oak and sawdust dominate the nose. If you can get through the oak you’ll find honey, corn, cinnamon, and beef jerky. On the palate it’s dry cornmeal, caramel, and a hefty portion of abrasive oak. The mid-palate is big spice with cinnamon, black pepper, clove, and oak. A short dry finish puts a bow on a whiskey that’s overly tannic, dry, and oaky.
      		
 
			
 
Cinnamon bark, oak, overripe nectarines, salted peanuts, and faint herbal notes open up this blended whiskey housed in the bottle with the clever geographical label. The structure starts light on the first sip, with Golden Delicious apples and honey lozenges, but then it thickens up mid-palate when the spiciness kicks in. Then it peters out. A decent spicy buzz finishes this perfectly serviceable blend composed by these determined newcomers to the Irish whiskey scene.
      		
 
			
 
Not exactly black. (More like russet, but Crown Royal Russet isn’t as catchy.) It’s nice to see the higher strength, and there’s definitely more flavor here than the standard Crown Royal or Crown Royal Reserve. But it’s missing the smoothness and elegance I cherish in other Crown Royal whiskies. Notes of molasses and maple syrup, accentuated by burnt fig, hints of pedro ximenez sherry, and raisin. There are suggestions of dark rum and bourbon in here. (Perhaps an alternative to both?) A whisky to drink on the rocks or as a mixer. 
      		
 
			
 
Antique amber. Deeper, brooding, and less sweet than the 14 year old bottling. Distinct notes of leather, roasted nuts, and hints of tobacco on the nose and palate, along with 
 of the flavors of its younger sibling. It works on the nose, but the tannins (both from the wine and oak) impart a leather component that just dominates the palate. (I am seeing a pattern here with these younger vs. older whiskeys in the Experimental Collection series. The younger expressions have generally been pretty good, while most of the older ones have been aged too long.) 

      		
 
			
 
Thick on the nose and palate. Nutty toffee, chewy caramel, milk chocolate, and molasses are quickly superseded on the palate by fiery cinnamon, dried citrus, blackberry, cocoa powder, barrel char, and teasing brisk evergreen. Long, warm, spicy, very dry, assertive finish. I like the nose much better than the palate, as I feel the dry finish overstays its welcome. A big, bold, bully of a Birthday Bourbon. 

-> On page 249 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Barton’s entry into the premium, small batch bourbon category is a heavy hitter indeed. There are flavors of toffee, leather, and resinous spices throughout, with some background notes of fruit (especially figs and dates) and a dusting of cocoa. This is a full, richly textured bourbon. Its aroma is lovely and everything is working well on the palate, too-until about mid-palate, where it becomes very woody, assertive, out of balance, and quite dry all the way through its finish, to the point of becoming excessive. Otherwise, this would be a great whiskey. 

      		
 
			
 
Bright gold color. Sweet pear, caramel apples, vanilla, and fudge on the nose. Light to medium in body. On the palate, there is more fruit (pear, citrus) and sweet malt (vanilla, caramel, and toffee), with a gently sweet finish.
   Style: Highland (Isle of Arran) single malt Scotch whisky. Price: high $30s. Available nationwide. 

   Again there is no age statement, and this one is still on the youthful side, but it is richer (some sherry cask aging in the mix?) and expresses more flavors-and deeper flavors-than the one mentioned above. It is still quite young, but it tastes more mature than its age (which is probably six years at the most). There's not much Island character here. 
      		
 
			
 
A sherry cask-matured Bowmore. Introduced as "the brother" to the 1989 vintage Bowmore released about a year ago (aged in bourbon casks). Notes of waxed fruit, dates, fruitcake, and raisin permeate through tarry rope, leather boots, wet socks, and ripe peat. Underlying notes of demerara rum, chocolate-covered coffee beans, and sea salt. A hedonistic Bowmore with an earthy, rustic demeanor. (1,800 bottles for the U.S.) 

      		
 
			
 
Only moderately peated (15ppm phenol), but a consistent influence. Quite fresh: reminds me of a walk around a traditional distillery, with notes of steeping barley, kiln smoke, and youthful spirit. A subtle, intriguing thread of gin botanicals (especially citrus peel) weaves its way through the palate. Otherwise, the smoke and fruit keep your attention.

      		
 
			
 
Inchmurrin is one of many single malts produced by Loch Lomond. It is made using lightly peated malt and matured in bourbon casks, and is named after one of the islands in Loch Lomond. Caramac chocolate and peanut butter on the sweet, fruity nose. The fruit motif continues on to the palate, where spicy malt, vanilla, and ripe peaches predominate. The finish is medium in length and nutty. £50
      		
 
			
 
Obviously aged in a sherry cask. Juicy fruit, syrupy, a bit waxy, notes of maple syrup and spice (clove, mint). Nicely soothing, but there is a trade-off here-the soft, floral beauty which makes Linkwood malt so attractive is lost somewhere behind the sherry and escapes only briefly from time to time. (Bottled exclusively for Binny’s Beverage Depot.) 

      		
 
			
 
Light onionskin color; the nose is scented with red fruits, cranberry sauce, hawthorn jelly, and red apple. With water there’s some bletted medlars mixed with lemon. Sadly, the palate is soapy to start with, before the super-ripe red fruits come through. Water makes things fresher, but overall it lacks personality.
      		
 
			
 
I have tasted many superb Longrow whiskies in the past 15 years (not to mention some wonderful Tokaji dessert wines). This isn’t one of them. Longrow is an assertive whisky, and I can see the logic of finishing the whisky in an equally big Hungarian wine. The flavors are equal in intensity -- and this is certainly a dynamic whisky -- but they just don’t integrate well. You’ll find notes of waxed fruit, raisin, ripe barley, smoked fig, and toffee. Cloying, waxy finish.
      		
 
			
 
This edition was matured in bourbon but finished in Madeira casks, which lends it a honeyed, sweet nose of cream soda, lychee, whole almond, and dried tropical fruit. Smartly, the finishing cask gives a lift but never dominates. A fresh, clean taste, but the mouthfeel has a frailty, so although you will find lemon, icing sugar, candy bananas, and molten honey, this doesn’t quite live up to its rousing name. £31
      		
 
			
 
Distilled at the start of 2009, this special edition was bottled mid-2014, making it a 5 ½ year old whisky. The nose is ashy paste with a good measure of barnyard funk along with sherry, oak, and clove spice. The entry is all ashtray, a late night of sweet wine and cigarettes. Sherry notes fight the smoke to emerge, but the smoke simply dominates. A smoky, ashy, spicy, and dry finish round out a face-slapper of a whisky. (
)
-> On page 250 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Touches of acetone and magic marker/solvent suggest that there’s precious little cask involvement going on here. Pleasing enough, with lime jelly and kiwi fruits, and a little whiff of sweet oak, but it’s very understated. In the mouth, it performs in a nutty way but doesn’t seem to have moved much over its quarter of a century sequestration. There is some horchata and brazil nut, even a mashy note, but it either needs more time or a kick to get it moving. £70
      		
 
			
 
Aged “over 2 years” and with over 38% rye in the mashbill (high for bourbon). It’s fresh, youthful, and brisk, with sweet corn, bright fruit, brittle mint, cinnamon, and a dusting of cocoa, leading to a slightly aggressive finish. A bit too youthful, actually, for sipping—it would benefit from a few more years’ aging. Save this one for your next Manhattan. Its sibling, Redemption Rye (of similar age), fares better. (I rated it an 84.)
      		
 
			
 
Kaiapoi is a small town in North Canterbury, New Zealand, and was in the frontline of the recent horrific earthquake that wrecked this pretty part of the south island. Made by distiller John Fitzgerald and matured for 13 years, this whisky has been something of a secret. It tastes like nothing else on earth. It’s like Germany’s Blaue Maus — working off a different template than scotch. Imagine sweet alcoholic hazelnuts giving way to spice. Lacks depth, though. 
      		
 
			
 
Made entirely with Spanish barley and showing healthy progress, this 10 year old single malt is further proof that owner Beam Global is committed to producing quality Spanish single malt. But it has some way to go. This is a señorita, not a matador, and is far too polite — more like a blend than a single malt. Orange jelly, marzipan, and apple pip all make an appearance, but it’s all too safe. 
      		
 
			
 
Prichard’s Double Barreled Bourbon is flavored with artisan chocolate. This dark chocolate is clear on the nose but not singular, as it's accompanied by strong oak, maple syrup, and cherry. On the palate, chocolate becomes more a supporting flavor for classic bourbon notes of oak, maple, caramel, and clove spice. The mid-palate is a little acidic and the chocolate adds a slight bitterness to the equation. The finish is a little too dry, but in all, an intriguing combination of flavors.
      		
 
			
 
“75% Grain Spirits.” Let’s get that right out there! Slight rose cast to the liquid, and a smell of caramel and brown sugar. Thin, with a hot finish, but drinkable. Honestly, while this is not something I’d even shoot with a beer chaser, it’s hardly flawed; this is clean and makes a decent mixer.
      		
 
			
 
Does this belong here, at 70% cane sugar and 30% corn/wheat? The process sure looks like whiskey, so we’ll let it slip in. The aroma’s sweet, but with a solvent rim to it. For 105 proof, this is pretty smooth stuff in the mouth. There are notes of melon and green corn, and a wet hint of fresh grass before the burner kicks on at the finish. It’s a hot end on this one, but not unpleasant. 
      		
 
			
 
New make fruit—pear, stewed apple—and rye spice in a hot, clean nose. That’s pretty much what you get in the mouth, too, with some dry paper notes, and a sweet finish. For some reason, I really want to try mixing this with Dr. Pepper. This is definitely a mixing spirit, mountain-style.
      		
 
			
 
A subtle essence of vanilla and restrained crispy oak are lathered in rich butterscotch, then seasoned with scorching pepper and a pinch of rye spices. Surprisingly, it’s not overly sweet. Smooth creamy custard coats your mouth, mellowing otherwise assertive spices. The dram finishes in pulling citrus pith with touches of peppery heat, tingling ginger and cloves, and fading hints of ripe cherries. Faint but distinct whiffs of barrels remind us that this colorless liquid is whisky. (Alberta only) C$40
      		
 
			
 
Prior to Prohibition, Golden Wedding was a fine American whiskey. Decades later, entrepreneur Louis Rosenstiel successfully revived the brand in Canada. The result shows hints of burnt toffee, dusty rye, dry grain, and pickle juice. Earthy elements underscore river plants and citrus pith. Hot, peppery spices bolster lively spirits while jammy fruit and floral overtones round out a straight-on mixer. A whisky that transforms ginger ale into ginger ale. (Canada only)C$24
-> On page 251 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Small barrel whiskey, 100% corn. Rich, sweet, oaky nose with—at first—notes of peppermint and Rice Krispies treats; nose collapses and becomes sharp, woody, burnt. Fiery mouth, smoky notes, dry wood, and hot mint are overwhelming and somewhat astringent. Finish lingers much longer than would be pleasant; hot and tingly, with a redeeming core of corn. Tastes like it was pushed, hard, to be done.
      		
 
			
 
The heritage grains movement influenced distiller Jesse Razaqpur at Toronto distillery to make whisky from an old-time Ontario variety called Red Fife. This hard red wheat contains less starch than the traditional soft wheat used for whisky making, yielding less spirit. Red Fife wheat also contains flavor-inducing anthocyanins, similar to red-grape flavenoids. Distinctive grain dust and slate-like mineral notes dominate the nose, translating into searing hot pepper, ripe red fruit, and a slight sourness on the palate. (
C$40/375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
While their home-distilled whisky matures, some dedicated craft whisky makers hone their blending skills using sourced whiskies to create blends such as this one. Caramel heated to the point of burning, and oily, freshly-roasted coffee with hints of real maple syrup gloriously overtake a spirity nose that betrays the youth of this simple, no age statement work in progress. Scrumptious elements of clean oak, burned lumber, sawdust, and earthy pineyness are beguiling, but would benefit from tighter balance. (
C$33
      		
 
			
 
What does this say about how far whisky has come? We live in an era where you can now buy the official whisky from a major motion picture. This has a deep amber color. 
 deep. The nose brings warm muffins, caramel, and grassy notes with a good dose of smoke. It’s a sweet concoction with a peppery kick. There’s a tinge of polypropylene before a short, clipped, spicy finish. It just needs to find more of its own identity.
      		
 
			
 
The entry level official Girvan is named after their ‘MPS’ distillation apparatus that distills at various pressures and under vacuum to vaporize and distill at lower temperatures. This is very light, with fresh whole pineapples, orange fondant creams, delicate vanilla, and risen dough. It’s fiendishly sweet (have a dental hygienist on standby), like a deep layer of butter frosting, sticky cotton candy, honey, overripe bananas, and spearmint. The expeditious finish tenders cookie mix, digestive biscuits, and a grind of pepper. £45
      		
 
			
 
Hailing from the Speyside distillery, this has a deep orange color and an aroma of damp hay and a slightly vegetal note alongside caramel and peanut brittle. A perception of bitterness beside dried peels. The palate is thick with stewing fruits, tinned prune, and burnt sugar, with a background note of wet draff. Water lifts things a little, but it's all rather sick and flabby. £150
      		
 
			
 
Even though it has more alcohol than Southern Shine’s straight ‘moonshine,’ the nose is fairly evasive, with subtle cinnamon apple. The entry is much sweeter than expected, with caramel, cinnamon, and apple, but manages to be well-balanced by the base spirit, which adds pepper spice and enhances the cinnamon. The apple notes flirt with artificiality but end up reading as dried apple. The finish is long and maintains the cinnamon-apple spice well, but is a tad hot.
      		
 
			
 
Lots of green notes in the nose of this mason jar variety of moonshine, including green apple, green bean, and wheat grass. Strong brewer’s yeast and cornmeal round things out in a highly aromatic nose. For the proof, the entry is remarkably soft and sweet, tasting like buttered cornbread. Fire and spice aren’t far behind, with black pepper, white pepper, and charred Cracker Jack. Long, dry, and slightly hot finish with a hint of popcorn and green bean.
      		
 
			
 
The range begins with this entry-level whisky, aged for 3 years. Aromas of pale toffee, vanilla, and scented, herbaceous notes can be found on the nose. It has a light, silky texture and comprises flavors of stewed fruits, with a slight bitterness behind them. Plum and coffee notes expand, though it remains tart through to the buzzy finish, which is lifted by hints of chocolate. A robust and pugnacious dram.
      		
 
			
 
Like the Whim Mocha Porter, this is certified organic; a wheat whiskey made with locally-grown hops. Hard to tease out hops vs. small barrel oak spice in the nose; it’s bold and shouty. Wow. The hops are explosive in the mouth, flashing bitter on the tongue. The first sip was shocking, now it’s settling in, and becoming smoother, but I just don’t think this much hops is a good idea in a whiskey. Price is per 375 ml.
-> On page 252 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Caramel, brown sugar, vanilla, generic sweetness. Smooth entry, and more of the same on the tongue with some alcohol heat in the finish. Very little wood at all. Begging to be poured into Coke. Maybe most jarring is that the Hatfield & McCoy “brand” recalls the infamous feud that took place on the Kentucky-West Virginia border…while this was distilled in South Carolina. At least the label’s honest as far as that. Sourced whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Plainly states it’s “aged four months in a small oak barrel.” Tame nose; working hard to pull out anything other than alcohol heat, some fresh-cut wet wood, and wet cereal. Quite hot, with lots of wet oak sawdust and sweet cinnamon that rocket right into the finish. Reminds me of a young teenager, running around, shouting at inappropriate moments, and very excited. Too young and hot right now. Put it back in the barrel; maybe a larger one. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Buttered popcorn combines with wet pavement, vanilla, and black pepper for an interesting but edgy nose. The entry is light and sweet with vanilla and buttered corn, and a silky smooth mouthfeel. The mid-palate thins things out a bit and shifts focus to strong black pepper. This black pepper drives a spicy and dry finish. Many white whiskies straddle the line between whisky and vodka, and this one edges a little too close to the vodka space.
      		
 
			
 
As the enterprising fellows at West Cork Distillers only built the place in 2007, this 10 year old must be sourced elsewhere. A decent nose with vanilla cupcakes fresh from the oven, dull lemon notes, tablet, and faint spices. It has a limited range, let down by a narrow flavor profile; acidic, lemony sharpness with a light mouthfeel. The sharpness strong-arms the sugariness for 30 seconds until toffee notes break through. An acerbic lemon bonbon in liquid form.
      		
 
			
 
An odd roaring noseful of spices: vanilla, pepper, ginger, teaberry. Tastes perfumey first, then resolves to sweet vanilla, hot oak, and more teaberry. Can’t decide if it wants to be bourbon—it’s hot, and flexing oak—or candy, and does a poor job at both; it’s like a linebacker in a French maid’s outfit, just wrong. There are much better sweet, spicy whiskey mixes out there; the original Spicebox comes to mind.
      		
 
			
 
Light in body and flavor, but what’s there is well balanced and easy to drink. You’ll find notes of sweet corn, caramel coated nuts, mint, and soft citrus notes. There needs to be more of what’s already there and it needs to be more complex for me to score it in the 80s. The bourbon is designed to compete with the entry level Jack Daniels and, from a quality standpoint, it does. 

      		
 
			
 
Nice to see Arran making it to 12 years old. Creamy on the palate and soothing in nature, with layers of sweetness (maple and butterscotch syrup, vanilla cream) and fruit (caramel apple, fried banana). Soft, congenial finish. A low-level yet persistent nutty/burnt rubber note detracts from what would otherwise be a very fun, pleasantly sweet whisky. (Note: at the time of publication, the whisky was not yet available in the U.S. Price above is UK price, converted to dollars).

      		
 
			
 
This whisky comes from two bourbon casks, producing only 112 bottles. I believe it’s the most expensive Lowland whisky on the market. Unfortunately, its flavor doesn’t stand up to its price. While I applaud Morrison Bowmore's efforts to give us the opportunity to try such a mature expression of Auchentoshan, I feel that the whisky is past its prime. I wouldn't describe it as overly woody, like I have other whiskies that are 41 years old. Rather, I would describe it as overly funky. The whisky's aroma and flavor are very peculiar, with plenty of vegetal notes (cucumbers especially) combined with stewed fruit, golden raisins, rose petals, and spice (anise, clove). If it were $100 a bottle, I would suggest that you gather a few friends to chip in and buy a bottle, just for the experience. But at $2,000, I think we should leave this one for the collectors.
      		
 
			
 
A very peculiar whisky. It’s interesting in some respects, with the thick, sweet Hungarian dessert wine fighting with damp peat smoke for attention. But it tastes a little disjointed, and a bit too youthful. With a few more years aging (before finishing in the Tokaji wine), the flavors should integrate and mature better. But as it is, this whisky is still “work in progress.” 

      		
 
			
 
The owners of Bunnahabhain are making a peated version of this normally unpeated Islay whisky to put in their peated blend, Black Bottle. But they have not yet put out, as a regular item, a peated expression of Bunnahabhain for purchase. However, some of the independent bottlers got their hands on some, and this might be the first one to be offered in the U.S. It’s what you would expect a 9 year old peated Bunnahabhain to taste like: toffee, vanilla fudge, and nuts (the Bunny signature), kiln peat smoke, and a bit too much youthfulness. It needs a few more years to mature to acceptable levels. (Bottled for Binny’s Beverage Depot.)

-> On page 253 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
The lightness of the hue suggests a very slow maturation in refill casks, and while I tried hard to get to grips with this, I found the nose simply too discreet. There’s a hint of the burning bonfire which indicates the subtle smoke that underpins Cragganmore; there’s even some parma violet, dried berries, and a hint of sulfur.
The palate picks things up a little, showing ferns, wet moss, Oolong tea, and dried apple, as well as citrus and — surprisingly — some just-lit cigar fuminess. It’s all rather understated, however. This is one of my top distilleries, but compared to the recent Special Releases and magnificent Friends of the Classic Malts bottlings, this is slightly underwhelming. 
      		
 
			
 
The second of the duo — destined for the U.S. and Taiwan — is a relative youngster and has been extracted from a fresh Spanish oak sherry hogshead. The combination of first-fill and smaller cask size is immediately apparent. The color is mocha dark and the nose has a distinctly sulfurous twist, behind which are black cherries dipped in chocolate, tonka bean, and leather. For me, there’s too much cask and not sufficient Rothes complexities, especially on the palate.
      		
 
			
 
Barely-aged white whiskey. Light, sharp fruit (brighter than the High West Single Malt), a brittle sweetness, new-make greenness. Quite smooth, even a bit creamy, with a light float of vanilla and a hit of grain in the middle. It all wafts away on a razor-edged cloud of a finish. Smooth for a white, but I'd like more substance. 
      		
 
			
 
Very mature and quite rich on the nose with thick toffee, molasses, maple syrup, suggestions of Pedro Ximinez sherry, deep sappy oak notes and background spices. Similar on palate entry, too-a mouthful of rich, chewy whiskey-but the whiskey then unfortunately turns very dry, with oak and leather notes that dominate. Save some $$ and get the more balanced 21 year old. 

      		
 
			
 
My feelings here are the same as for the Sherrywood: it comes across as younger and less mature than the original Madeira wood finish version. This one has some peat smoke in the mix. Malty sweet (with some graham cracker, nougat, and hints of butterscotch), peppered with light smoke. Quick, lightly smoky finish.
      		
 
			
 
Hot solvents on the nose, reminiscent of Hinkle’s Easter egg dyes. Heavy-handed sweet wash of caramel, very hot, cloying finish. Not easy to see this as related to the clean innocence of the standard expression.  
      		
 
			
 
The discontinued 10 year old CC Reserve was typical of the hard-rye genre, with vanilla, caramel, ripe fruit, and hot pepper stitched onto a flinty-firm base. This new 9 year old version, though similar, has obvious differences. Pleasing heat rides an initial surge of toffee, dry grain, and dried dark fruit. A soon-to-arrive pithiness on the shortish finish refreshes, but without the familiar steeliness of its antecedent. 
      		
 
			
 
This whisky is only 10 months old, made from 85% rye and 15% malted barley. It’s vibrantly spicy (cinnamon, mint, licorice root, nutmeg), fresh, and clean. Bright citrus and peach also entertain. Rich, underlying vanilla notes try to tame the beast, but they’re really no match. Warm, spicy finish. There’s a lot going on here. Yes, it’s youthful, but far more mature than I expected. This whisky is certainly drinkable now (for those who like their rye whiskey young and bold), but I would like to see it develop some more on oak. That’s the only thing missing here. It shows great potential.
      		
 
			
 
Crisps the nose hairs a bit, but it’s pure corn, even a bit of cornbread. Tip a sip in, and it’s nothing but more green corn, sweet, fresh — hot, for sure, but not overwhelming — and pretty tasty for what it is. With white whiskey, we’re walking the fine line between flavor and raw wound at all times, and this one finds the line.
      		
 
			
 
Smelling the rye from a foot away after pouring. Exceptionally clean aroma of grain; the oily/spicy rye notes come through clearly. Quite smooth. Not a lot of flavors: very focused on the rye itself, with grain and just a touch of mint. A long finish with sweet grain that slowly turns to mint in the end. 
-> On page 254 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Single barrel, cask proof. Strong wood aromas; pencil shavings, hot-sawn oak. Hot and tight, intense wood. There’s some interesting stuff around the edges, but the wood’s blocking it till some sweetness peeks through at the end. Water helps a little, but not enough. Over-barreled.
      		
 
			
 
This is matured in 100 liter casks, and the port is all over the youthful spirit. But while the combination leaves a lot to be desired, and there are all sorts of youthful errors on show, the fruity, rich, and creamy core of this malt suggests that we’re looking at the stirring of a giant. Bottled this fall at 4 years, this is a holding tank. What follows will be immense. AUD180 (Not available in the U.S.)
      		
 
			
 
A predominantly young blended malt heads up the first of the Reference Series, designed as an educational tool to help attune your palate. It’s a light, floral array, with waxed lemons, oatcakes, and peppermint. Mouthfeel is thin with little structure, heavy on the barley, with hints of boiled fruit candies. Sipped neat, it’s drying, with doughy notes and dried apple. Water fails to enliven the experience, other than showing late lemon and icing sugar. Memorize it, and move up. £37
      		
 
			
 
Hellyers Road is Tasmania's biggest distillery, formed by dairy producers who feared the island's dairy business was under threat from mainland producers and needed a fallback policy. Early bottlings were dreadful, but this is a big step forward. It's still an acquired taste, though, with rootsy, vegetal, and grassy Scottish Lowland elements. It's saved by a cocoa powder, mint chocolate, and puff pastry heart.  $AUS 120
      		
 
			
 
There’s a somewhat oily, faint green look to this in the bottle. Strong aroma of corn, some green apple, and a faint hint of smoke and wet dog. Tastes a bit medicinal with a smoky richness and a surprisingly full mouthfeel. Sweet finish adds to the general impression that this one needs cleaned up a bit…or demands a different approach.
      		
 
			
 
Berkshire Mountain Distillers uses locally grown corn here, aged on local oak and cherry wood. The nose is sweet and sharp, smelling of corn, grass, and tart cherries. Corn and ash dominate the hot, slippery mouth, with a finish that turns sweeter as it dwindles, with some faint fruit notes, but the heat is hard to overcome. If it were my corn, I’d put it into the bourbon instead; this is a bit thin. 
      		
 
			
 
Odd aroma, more like a weedy, aromatic bark than honey; wonder what the bees were gathering from? Very sweet, on the rich and cloying side, but without the real honey character that makes Jack Daniel’s Honey the best of this bunch, and I can’t get over the aroma. The only saving grace is that even at 35%, the bourbon still manages to peek through; it’s not enough.
      		
 
			
 
Rum—“screech,” as it is called where it is made—is Newfoundland’s spirit of choice. With three shots of screech and a ceremony involving fish, visitors are transformed into honorary Newfies. This 3 year old Amherst whisky, custom blended for the Newfoundland Liquor Commission, is ancient by comparison. It’s a basic mixer that arrives peppery hot with strong overtones of half-tamed spirit. Dusty wood, lime peels, and burnt toffee foretell a leisurely slide into refreshing bitterness. Definitely not screech. 
 C$25
      		
 
			
 
Lakes distillery will become the fifth English whisky producer when it starts distilling this year. That puts England on the whisky map. Before then, though, this is its first bottling: a blend of British whiskies, though I'm not sure what that means exactly. The nose is fine, but on the palate it's like skiing on end-of-season snow: you get to ski, but it's a thin, wet, and not totally comfortable ride. England expects…better. £30
      		
 
			
 
Sweet, heavy vanilla, powdered sugar, and dog-toothed spring violets, it smells very light with soft hints of sweet floral perfume. What begins as viscous and creamy on the tongue suddenly becomes refreshingly bitter and loaded with hot, singeing spices. Pepper and dried candied orange peel linger while the sweetness dims. A pleasing bitter finish fades into a warm glow. Although the whisky struggles at first, it breaks through in the middle with its spices and heat. 
C$31
-> On page 255 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Root beer (wintergreen, sugar, a bit of cinnamon) and oak on the nose; whiskey/oak predominates. There’s actually a lot of whiskey flavor here, too, though it’s not great whiskey, the finish gets sweet and clingy, and the mix seems forced. Still…root beer-flavored whiskey? In an aluminum bottle? Why not just buy some whiskey and put it in your root beer? Then when you come to your senses, you can drink the whiskey like a civilized human.
      		
 
			
 
Robert McNish conceived his recipe for a lighter style of Highland whisky in Glasgow in 1863 (though the brand added an ‘a’ to his surname for easier pronunciation). Whole orange, ground hazelnut, and ground ginger on the nose, though it keeps pretty tight-lipped. Light and sweet in the mouth, with mandarin and more pronounced ginger mid-palate before a medium-length finish of bubblegum and gooseberry. It just seems a little uninspiring given the special occasion.
      		
 
			
 
Lemony, pine woods, even some seashore aromas over the sweetness of the malt whiskey underneath. Not overly bitter, more whiskey-sweet, and the aromas are subdued in the mouth. I like a big hoppy IPA, but this isn’t setting my palate. I think it’s missing the body of a beer. I have yet to have a hopped whiskey that I really like; this isn’t it either.
      		
 
			
 
Extremely dark color; aged in ten-gallon barrels. A thick burbling nose, full of dark aromas: smoke, molasses, earth, and moist tobacco, with a sharp woody twist around the outside. The mouth recapitulates much of that, but in a brighter fashion…and then the small barrel takes over; tight, intense wood that blows out everything else and leaves the tongue tingling. I find it hard to tease out any spirit character; what’s this whiskey taste like under the wood?
      		
 
			
 
Boldly, this is naturally colored (barely colored) 3 year old grain whisky presented in a tall, clear bottle. The predominant aroma of corn husks is mixed with a sentimental schoolroom whiff of white glue peeled from the fingertips. There’s wheat cracker, bread, cooked ham, dripping foliage, and chopped parsley. A clean, refreshing mouthfeel with pleasant marshmallow sweetness is nixed by flavors of corn, sliced bread, and vanilla, but they are hastily extinguished. A finishing spicy glimmer shuts down quickly too.
      		
 
			
 
Although this moonshine may look down-home in a mason jar, it was produced using the highly technical TerrePure process, designed to remove most congeners. The result is a corn neutral spirit that doesn’t smell or taste much like corn. Instead, it’s soft vanilla, toasted marshmallow, and a dash of salt. A little heat and white pepper round things out for a long, peppery-dry finish. It’s pretty good for a vodka, but is it really moonshine or white whiskey? Probably not.
      		
 
			
 
From TerrePure; there’s that reassuring note on the label that the whiskey is “Aged at least six months.” Nose is somewhat flat, compressed; diner mints, old cinnamon sticks, cattle feed. Tastes thin, sweet, hot, and not very complex. There’s a flash of something more just before the swallow: corn, hot mint. But it vanishes in a bland, quick finish. Uninspiring, if surprisingly smooth for 6 month old whiskey.
      		
 
			
 
Aged one day in new American oak, this white dog ekes out the very minimum requirements for bourbon. The nose is heavy barnyard, complete with hay, horse, and manure. Beyond the funk is cornmeal, cashew, and apple blossom. The palate is light and what you'd expect, with yeasty cornbread, sour apple, apple blossom, and black pepper. The funk is still there but not as intense as on the nose. Interesting overall character with aging potential, but for now it’s unbaked.
      		
 
			
 
A special limited edition release of Early Times whisky. Described as “Old Style Sour Mash” on the label. Simple, straight-forward notes of soft vanilla, sweet corn, light caramel, golden raisin, and (with some coaxing) subtle anise. Youthful on the palate, with a rather harsh, oak finish. I’m happy for the celebration, but a bit disappointed with the whisky. Two bottles of this (the volume equivalent of one standard 750 ml bottle) will set you back about $24, and there are many superior whiskies at this price point. Price is per 375ml bottle.
      		
 
			
 
It certainly is cinnamon: got a nose full of it, and not Red Hots, either, this is real cinnamon, just missing the depth of Vietnamese and with, yes, a bit of whisky there. There's next to no whisky in the mouth, though; this is like a cup of sweet cinnamon tea, something I'd add whisky to. Too sweet, too cinnamon. Where's the whisky?
-> On page 256 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Warm maple, caramel, and salt in the nose, like caramels being melted for making cookies (something my wife does every Christmas). Thin, boozy maple in the mouth. Disappointing, though I suppose it would be good in desserts, or on desserts. But I really expect more whisky, even in a flavored whisky under 40%.
      		
 
			
 
There's a medicinal, darkroom aroma right up front, and a dry graininess (with just a dusting of baker's chocolate) to the nose. It carries through in the mouth, with a faintly chemical astringency that takes away from the underlying corn sweetness. Very hot finish. Water helps bring more sweetness out a bit, but cuts some of the body out from under. 
      		
 
			
 
Young, but dark; this one's finished in sherry barrels. Peppery, sweet, fruity aromas make it hard to separate the whiskey from the sherry influence. Lots of sherry wood in the mouth, too; oily, waxy, but the whiskey comes through clearly now, with sheaves of rye rolling across the tongue. The sherry is too heavy-handed, it has more presence than it should. Maybe more blending of un-sherried whiskey would work. 
      		
 
			
 
The least exciting or distinctive of the Santis range and in some ways the most Germanic and European, with a soft, sweet, and rounded taste that, depending on your point of view, is either flabby and ill-defined, or delightfully soft and cushion-like; the whisky equivalent of eating a milk chocolate bar with a honeycomb center.  €32
      		
 
			
 
Since Diageo has included Knockando in its Special Release program it seemed only right to reacquaint myself with the standard bottling. This is Speyside in its maltiest guise. The nose is reminiscent of breakfast cereal: Weetabix and bran flakes, with a whisper of vanilla. The palate is light and dusty, and you get the impression that the malt just wants to scuttle across the tongue and down the throat as quickly as possible. A shy wee mouse of a dram. £30
      		
 
			
 
A generally sweet palate (a bit too sweet, actually), with vanilla, sweet corn, caramel, marzipan, candied fruit, and a suggestion of red and black licorice, peppered with cinnamon. Slightly harsh on the finish. I wish there was more to balance all the sweetness. (Perhaps some extra aging for some additional dry oak spiciness?)
      		
 
			
 
The first thing out of the glass is bourbon — 80 proof bottlings will do that — followed by a secondary note of strong-brewed tea with a dollop of honey. It's quite sweet, and hot, and the tea largely disappears except as a frill around the edges. This is more a honey drink than a tea drink, and there are better honey drinks out there.
      		
 
			
 
A medicinal cherry smell, like cough syrup and cherry PEZ, edged with a nutty hint of almonds. Medium-bodied; a slow-flow on the tongue. The cherry doesn’t taste real (like Red Stag’s does), and the SoCo sweetness doesn’t help that. There is a pickup at the end, as the spirit seems to evaporate off the tongue. I can’t help thinking that this should have been a slam-dunk…but they missed.
      		
 
			
 
From the Land of the Thunder Dragon comes this blend of 8 and 12 year old malts and grain from the Gelephu distillery. It’s clean, light, and fragrant with dried hay notes; like drinking chamomile tea in a tropical greenhouse. The thin flavors show custard tarts, cracker bread, and pencil erasers with a bitter aftertaste of burnt spices. So, not so great as a sipping whisky, but I’ve found it versatile as a base for summer cocktails.
      		
 
			
 
Light amber color; no age statement, not labeled as “straight whiskey.” Nose of spiced hard candies, wet oak, mint. Very hot mouth, thin body, muddled flavors of candy and wood. Quite young, with a hot, unpleasant finish. The unaged Lovell Bros. is both more enjoyable and more interesting.
-> On page 257 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
A non-age statement Spanish malt whisky. Whereas Scotch whisky is often a showcase of the grain, this Spanish malt is all about spotlighting the unique Palo Cortado sherry cask. Monster raisin leads things off and is followed by apricot jam, honey, ginger, and grape blossom. The impact of sherry is so great, it borders on tasting like an interesting young Spanish brandy. A very spicy mid-palate, which is a little hot, drives a very dry finish. (
)
      		
 
			
 
There are three different Hirsch Canadian Whisky expressions: 8, 10, and 12 years old. The 8 year old is my pick of the three, with some creamy vanilla, biscuit, subtle caramel, and a hint of honey. The alcohol is quite dominant and the finish unrefined with solvent-like notes. The 10 and 12 year olds express less flavor complexity and are somewhat harsh on the finish. They’re not good enough to drink neat or on the rocks and too expensive to drink as a mixer ($38 for the 10 year old; $44 for the 12 year old.). Rating for the 10 year old: 72; rating for the 12 year old: 70. 

      		
 
			
 
Pale gold color. Aromas of sweet pear, lemon, green apples, and vanilla. Light in body. Flavors are very youthful and similar to its aroma. Youthful finish. 
   Style: Highland (Isle of Arran) single malt Scotch whisky. Price: high $30s. Available nationwide. 

   This Robert Burns World Federation Arran Single Island Malt is the Calvados or Poire Williams of the whisky world. There's no age statement on this whisky, but it has the classic aromas and flavors of sweet pears prominent in very young distilled spirits. The vanilla notes, along with its pale color, suggest a used bourbon cask. I suppose one could treat it as an aperitif, and possibly chill it down or serve it on the rocks. 
      		
 
			
 
Citrus peel, light maple syrup, and almonds, with emerging grape and vanilla. Somewhat elegant in nature, but the flavors do not especially complement each other. (Exclusive to Binny’s Beverage Depot.) 

      		
 
			
 
Mackmyra makes no secret of the fact that it borrowed the idea for this release from its American friends. The name means 'white dog,' but the taste is all Scotland. It's sappy, fresh, raw, and vegetal, with some pleasing menthol notes. Perhaps the most interesting aspect of it is how much like scotch new make it tastes, suggesting that Swedish barrels have a very big say in the final product. SEK 319
      		
 
			
 
It's great that Irish whiskey is thriving and William Grant has bought Tullamore Dew. But they need help. To paraphrase English football fans, someone doesn't know what he's doing. The label says this is 12 years old, small batch, and limited edition. What? The normal whiskey is a blend and there's no distillery. So what is this, and why small batch? The whiskey's a mess, too — flabby, characterless, and confused — the whiskey equivalent of a karaoke singer doing Led Zeppelin.  
      		
 
			
 
A new “upgrade” from the standard Old Crow, which is only three years old. Soft aroma of sweet corn, candy corn, vanilla, and light caramel, all following through on the palate. It finishes sweet (too sweet, actually), a bit grainy, and slightly hot. If this brand is meant to compete with Evan Williams, then this four year old should be the standard “Old Crow” and the Reserve expression should be more like five or six years old, because the standard Evan Williams bottling (with no age statement) is clearly superior to Old Crow Reserve. Old Crow Reserve is too sweet and lacks the oak notes needed for balance and complexity. Acceptable enough as a mixing bourbon or perhaps on the rocks, but I wouldn’t drink this neat or with water.
      		
 
			
 
Very light in aroma and flavor. There are no off flavors. It’s just uninspiring. Delicate notes of vanilla custard, honey, caramel corn, sweet corn, and subtle fruit. Fleeting finish. 
      		
 
			
 
This is new make from the Rittenhouse Rye mashbill, unaged, right off the still. Yeasty mash notes come through strongly, with a big nose of rye and corn underneath. It smells fresh, and alive. Wow, that’s powerful stuff. Much hotter than the Trybox Corn, this one is on fire with rye spice; it’s got me breaking a sweat! A bit of water brings out more grain notes, and some tempering sweetness, but it’s still no pussycat. Cleanly powerful. 
      		
 
			
 
Provocative: spelt’s an interesting aroma. Grainy and a bit earthy, with hints of golden delicious apple all combining in the nose. There’s a fast, high flow of creaminess that spreads quickly and disappears, leaving a slightly fruity, grainy aftertaste. Interesting sensations, and again, quite clean. 
-> On page 258 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Aromas are soft and creamy, with a waft of sweet corn — underlain with a fairly blunt alcohol burn that comes through more as you smell it. Quite sweet on the palate, a wash of green corn, but the flavor isn’t enough to tangle successfully with the fuel, which leads to a tongue-curlingly hot finish. Some definite potential, but it really needs time in a big oak barrel (or some ice and a bottle of Dr. Pepper). 
      		
 
			
 
What a contrast with the standard bottling. Here we have Knockando in a hugely active cask and, sadly, its fragile character collapses under the assault. The nose is oily and sulphury with notes of sealing wax, Turkish tobacco, and maraschino. The palate is dry and tannic, the opposite of what is needed for a whisky that is nutty and dusty in the first place.
      		
 
			
 
Minnesota is a favored destination for Canadian vacationers from the prairies, and a hotbed for Canadian whisky. The Ellington Whisky Company calls Princeton (Minneapolis) home. Here, it bottles whiskies imported from Canada. Where from, exactly? A trade secret. Caramel, prune juice, ripe yellow fruits, and hints of cooked, buttery corn mute a dry, spirity nose. Peppery and spicy, it blends caramel, bitter lemon soda, sweet ginger, and orange Fanta. Canadian whisky unlike any found in Canada. But do add cola. C$11
      		
 
			
 
Faint spice aroma becomes more apparent after sitting for 20 minutes; initial pour smelled much like the Reserve Cherry (see below). Christmas cookie spices. Thick and sweet, spice is more evident. Not bad, but pretty thick and not much bourbon flavor for 45%.
      		
 
			
 
Deep on the nose and heavy on the palate. Enjoyably perfumed aromas and an entertaining palate, with both showing a complex array of chewy toffee, cinnamon, candied fruit, roasted nuts, dusty cocoa, and tobacco. But a very tactile leather and oak resin component dominates mid-palate through to the finish, spoiling the party. It’s past its prime.

      		
 
			
 
Its age certainly shows, with a good dose of leather, tobacco, and barrel char. Sweet notes of caramel, toffee, and candied fruit try to rescue it, but ultimately fails toward the finish, leaving my mouth parched, leathery, and craving a glass of water (or a beer!). A bourbon with individuality, but it pains me to think what this could have been (or once was).
      		
 
			
 
Huge oak impact for such a young whisky. Fresh oak shavings, dry vanilla, and subtle toasted coconut throughout. Some dried fruit, sultana, and toffee up front, but this is quickly consumed by the oak. Dry, hot, resinous finish. Not an old whisky, but already showing too much oak.

      		
 
			
 
Deep, thick nose, with sappy oak, dried citrus, old leather, spearmint, and background leafy smoke. Nicely viscous on the palate, with similar notes as the aroma. But mid-palate the age gets the best of this whisky. The flavors flatten out and the wood dominates through the finish as the leather notes linger.

   It’s a rare treat to taste a whisky this old. If you like Lalique (and have the money), then this new bottling is worth some consideration, because there are certainly moments of intrigue and pleasure on the nose and beginning of the palate. But I have tasted several other 50-plus year old Macallans, and I can say with certainty that the 50 year old Millennium bottling and the 1946 vintage release were better and can probably still be found for a significantly lower price (Only 420 bottles available worldwide.)
      		
 
			
 
A lively light fruitiness (white grapes, green plum) in the nose. Quite grainy, but with an interesting hint of vanilla and a slight saltiness. Finish is a bit astringent, unlike the other Koval spirits. I’m finding these an interesting exercise in distillation, and educational. 
      		
 
			
 
So that’s what wheat smells like: not much. The aromas here seem to be mostly yeast-derived, with a faint ripe fruitiness (undefined: peach, apple?) and alcohol heat, and a touch of wheat-origin sweet grass. Wheat’s in the mouth, like chewing fresh grain with some water and alcohol. It’s all there, and the finish is sweet, and it’s clean, but…that’s about all. White bread whiskey. 
-> On page 259 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Nose is sweet corn, with some mintiness to it, and some herbal notes; hot, but not off-putting. Tastes are not as sweet as expected. A bit flat, though the sweet corn does come through toward the end. Again, though, this one is quite hot, which is not surprising; the Hudson Baby Bourbons — which this is the foundation for — have struck me as hot also. Price is per 375 ml.
      		
 
			
 
Given the Beam house character of cinnamon, I thought this was redundant till I got a whiff of the sweet cinnamon coming off this, like a tea made from Red Hots candies. The drink itself is thickly sweet, and more of the hot cinnamon candy overwhelms anything else; the bourbon is largely lost here. If anything, the finish is even more heavy-handed.  
      		
 
			
 
Based on the Hayes Parker bourbon. Faint cherry aroma; not sure I’d pick it out without the label’s help. Quite sweet, but still; the cherry character is not so much subtle or faint, as just not there. There is some sweet cherry candy character at the very end. Disappointing.
      		
 
			
 
The loyalty to Canadian Leaf shown by some rye-and-coke drinkers in the Northeastern border states speaks to the broad appeal of whisky in general. With creamy caramel, toffee, sweet burnt sugar, and a pleasant, spice-fired warmth, it makes a great mixing whisky. A certain sharpness and spirity overtones render it less interesting as a sipper. Simple, flawless, and well-executed, but not particularly exciting, this is the light Canadian whisky of yesteryear.
      		
 
			
 
One of the Barton whiskies acquired by Sazerac in 2009, Canadian Supreme is a dry, dusty mixer that blossoms in ginger ale. Neat, the nose opens slowly to dried fruit, while the palate is grassy, almost mashy, with butterscotch pudding and a peppery glow. Though not at all tannic, still it becomes a bit pulling in the middle before giving way to prunes, raspberries, and maraschino cherries. The finish is surprisingly long and hot.
      		
 
			
 
" Straight from them there oak cask barrels to this here bottle," the label reads. Light, gently sweet notes of vanilla and caramel corn are the core of this whiskey. Inter-dispersed notes of mint, charred oak, and candied fruit are also present. The label also states "Sure enough smooth." True, I have had harsher whiskeys, but I’ve also had many that were smoother -and within this price range. In fact, there are several bourbon whiskeys on the market at this price that are at least this smooth and with a lot more flavor. 

      		
 
			
 
This Lowland distillery only operated from 1957-1975. Huge bourbon impact on the nose and palate, along with vanilla, coconut, stewed fruit, and dried wood spice -- especially on the finish, with lingering notes of anise, espresso, very dark chocolate, and charcoal. A taste of history for sure, but this is a whisky that never was meant to be aged this long.
      		
 
			
 
Port Ellen is going to just keep getting rarer and more expensive, and the quality is going to get more variable. This one shows the traditional Port Ellen characteristics (seaweed, tar, charcoal, damp earth, vanilla, salt, white pepper), but it just seems to flatten out mid-palate, leading to a fairly lifeless, slightly astringent finish. I feel like some of the guts were ripped out of this whisky. Bottling at a higher strength (and not chill-filtered) would have helped immensely.

      		
 
			
 
When they say berry, they mean berries: baskets of blueberries, blackberries, and raspberries, until suddenly the palate veers off into grape popsicles. This is one sweet, unabashedly faux-fruity potation, but other than traces of oak, not much whisky flavor remains. Still, in the right hands it could be a lot of cocktail fun. Rather than serving it in a whisky glass, a dram or two on French vanilla or coconut-milk ice cream is genuinely scrumptious. 
      		
 
			
 
Very similar to the Midwest Wheat in aroma, with a slight additional tanginess…but that could be from sensory deprivation. Drier in the mouth, with a slight medicinal character to it that increases as the finish goes on; like a high school chemistry lab storeroom, or a bottle of fresh aspirin. 
-> On page 260 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Made from 100% rye, and USDA certified organic. Very hot for 40%; herbal nose, very green with rye. Much smoother on the palate, and very quick. There’s a fast shot of rye mint up front, some grassiness, and a sharp flick of heat…and then it vanishes, leaving only a fading flinty-sweet afternote. Clean, but not a lot of substance.
      		
 
			
 
Cinnamon hearts. Very sweet and crazy hot with cinnamon. The cinnamon so dominates this liqueur-like drink that very little whisky manages to peek through until the very end of a long, murderously hot finish. Even then, cinnamon overrides the whiskyness, leaving a drink rather than a dram. Fun, yes, great fun, and almost certainly a bracing shooter, but it may be difficult to convince the whisky aficionado to think of this as whisky.
      		
 
			
 
Early trial batches of this whisky, flavored by cold infusion, tasted like sweet, roasted squash. However, the final version that we have here is as inviting as the nutmeg-laced pumpkin pie it so resembles. Sweet vanilla and salt water taffy fill the air, with rummy Christmas eggnog taking up the rear. Unusual in that it’s sweet but not syrupy. Hot pepper lingers, as do sweet tingling spices, but the whisky notes just barely show their presence. (
C$22
      		
 
			
 
A tad thin for sipping, Five Star is a quintessential mixing whisky, laden with dusty rye and citrus pith; it begs for ginger ale. First, though, sip it neat, and feel it blossom in your mouth; it brims with spirit, caramel, and blistering pepper. Behind these linger orange zest, herbaceous tones, creamy corn, and refreshing bitterness. Tingling rye spices that play off the pepper perk up its sweet fruitiness. Now mix it, and delight in its straightforward simplicity. (Canada only) C$22
      		
 
			
 
Cinnamon is reputed to have medicinal qualities, but you can bet those who drink Catch Fire Cinnamon do so for the incinerating jolt of sweet, spicy heat. Cinnamon hearts and hints of grain dust, almost like those cinnamon sticks in Christmas punch. Sweet, but not cloying. A creamy mouthfeel and touch of whisky wood remind us, if vaguely, that Catch Fire is whisky. The Lynne Truss of flavored whiskies: shoots, winces, and leaves with a long glowing finish.
      		
 
			
 
Perhaps my least favorite of all the Experimental Collection releases to date. The nose shows nicely, but it comes across as rather aggressive and harsh on the palate toward the finish, which the label describes as being “earthy.” Otherwise, the whiskey is pleasantly sweet, with molasses, date, and fig, plus charcoal, leather, and bitter resin in the mix. Price is per 375 ml.  
      		
 
			
 
Origins is Benromach’s new program to highlight different aspects of whisky-making, which I think is a great idea. This expression focuses on the use of Golden Promise barley to make the malt, which is then aged in a sherry cask. Unfortunately, there’s so much sherry here that I struggle to appreciate the impact or distinction from the Golden Promise barley. Notes of ripe orchard fruit, tangerine, beeswax, sticky toffee pudding, and toasted almond. Lingering smoke and waxed fruit stays through to the finish. A weighty Benromach (from the Golden Promise and/or the sherry). I find the nose pleasant enough, but the sherry-induced waxed fruit component that emerges mid-palate is just too dominant. 

      		
 
			
 
Quite pale in color. Very youthful and naked, with damp peat, leafy smoke, charred oak, and black licorice, pears in honey and vanilla-tinged barley. Quite an eye-opener for a non-Islay whisky. It’s a little green and ornery. Certainly an entertaining whisky, but a few more years in the barrel would round this whisky out, meld the flavors together, and add depth. 

      		
 
			
 
Youthful, and somewhat brooding for a Tomintoul. I can tell there’s some young whisky in here, as there’s a suggestion of new make spirit interwoven with notes of heather, ripe barley, raw peat, and lingering smoke. I like the concept, but wish the young component (the peated part of this whisky?) was matured a bit longer. 

      		
 
			
 
Its best attributes are vanilla, toasted coconut, and tropical fruit, but the rest of this grain whisky is a bit of a disappointment. It is thin, and at times harsh. A paint thinner component is evident (especially on the nose), along with more wood on the finish than this thin body can handle. Two Carsebridge grain Scotch whiskies from Duncan Taylor which I have tasted recently were much better: richer and creamier, and with more balance.
-> On page 261 of 235...        0.01%
      		
 
			
 
Artificial cherry aroma, like cherry PEZ, and barely a hint of bourbon. The taste is not overpoweringly sweet at all, a surprise, and there's a nutty, almost Luxardo-like character in the cherry that would be more interesting if it weren't for the soapy notes and bitter medicinal flavor of the whiskey. A more natural cherry character would net a higher rating.  
      		
 
			
 
Many moonshine products are centered around corn, but Freedom Moonshine mixes it up with a mashbill of 95% rye and 5% malted barley. Yeasty rye bread defines the nose with an undercurrent of white grape. The entry is soft, with yeasty rye, vanilla, and bran flakes. There’s some structure in the mid-palate with rye spice and black pepper but it needs more. The finish is a little flat, all pointing to the need for a slightly higher proof.
      		
 
			
 
Aged for “at least” one month, this bourbon is a collaboration with the band Fierce Dead Rabbit. Better Days is pale gold and noticeably cloudy. On the nose it’s paste, yeasty bread dough, and wet pavement. On the palate it is all over the place with raw oak, cinnamon, almond, and black pepper. There's no balance and no integration. The finish is short, hot, and dry. As whiskey ages, it goes through odd, awkward phases, and that's where this one is.
      		
 
			
 
No age statement on this grain whisky made from Spanish corn and aged in Palo Cortado sherry casks. Whereas the Navazos-Palazzi malt captured the richness of the sherry, the grain seems to pull the more acidic and dry qualities. Here it's dry sherry, coffee bean, brown sugar, and white pepper. Much hotter and drier than the Navazos-Palazzi malt, it explodes with heat and spice. This grain whisky was probably never meant to be consumed unblended, and it shows. (
)
      		
 
			
 
A big bourbon in many respects, but this is one whiskey where I would have happily settled for a “Single Barreled.” I tasted this whiskey straight from the barrel right before it was bottled and it was more aggressive; I think the lower strength and chill-filtering has helped to tame this beast. To be honest, there are some good qualities to this whiskey. The nose is wonderful! Even the palate starts out fine, with chewy toffee, molasses, dark fruit, raisins, and dates. But it is quickly consumed by intensely dry oak spice, gripping resin, and leather, which clings to my tongue and won’t let go. In this instance, 
 impressions are lasting impressions. Price is per 375 ml.

      		
 
			
 
Aged in a sherry cask, which adds sweet notes of toffee, Caribbean rum, waxed fruit, red licorice, and fruitcake to go along with the earthy smoke and lingering peat. A much sweeter, fruitier affair than the Croftengea also reviewed here, but behind all that sherry there’s still a whisky that needs a little more maturing. 

      		
 
			
 
One of the most popular flavored whiskies today is Fireball cinnamon, so it’s no surprise that other cinnamon whiskies are entering the market. This one has a lovely, woody, cinnamon nose that bursts into sweet, blistering cinnamon on the palate. Cinnamon is a natural whisky flavor, but here, rather than complement the underlying whisky, it completely masks it. This is a cinnamon liqueur, and a good one. A fun shooter, perhaps, but it’s barely whisky.
      		
 
			
 
The nose starts with sweet corn, cornmeal, yeasty bread, and black pepper, with wet dog and a slight varnishy note right behind. The entry is soft and round, with dry cornmeal, bran flakes, and yeasty bread. Unfortunately, the varnish note from the nose returns pretty clearly in the mid-palate along with black pepper. Everything wraps up with a shorter than expected finish. The heart of this whiskey is interesting, but it could benefit from a much tighter cut. (
)
      		
 
			
 
Earthy, fleshy notes with brooding grape notes and a gamey finish -- the Nebbiolo grape influence is obvious. I enjoy Barolo wine and I enjoy Edradour whisky, but the flavors in this whisky mix like oil and water. (Exclusive to Binny’s Beverage Depot.)
      		
 
			
 
The sherry is very dominant and cloying, which is unfortunate. And I’m not crazy about the quality of the sherry (or perhaps even the wood it was aged in). I have great respect for both Highland Park and Binny’s, but this is somewhat disappointing for a Highland Park. Tasted twice, with the same opinion. (Bottled for Binny’s Beverage Depot) 

